2022 8th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Communication Systems (ICACCS) 
Vision Based Surveillance Robot for Military 
Applications
Janani K1, Gobhinath S2, Santhosh Kumar K V3, Roshni S4, Rajesh A5  
1, 2 Assistant Professor, Department of EEE, Dr.N.G.P Institute of Technology, Coimbatore. 
3, 4, 5 UG Scholar,Department of EEE, Dr. N.G.P Institute of Technology, Coimbatore. 
1 mailtojanani@gmail.com, 2s.gobhinath@gmail.com 
Abstract - Security and monitoring are extremely important in 
our current society. An efficient monitoring system aids in the 
analysis of stranded places where humans are unable to access. 
We intend to construct a surveillance robot that can conduct 
both active and passive surveillance, with an autonomous 
patrol mode and a manual mode that alerts the operator when 
motion is detected. The surveillance system can travel within 
the surveillance area, allowing more areas of interest to be 
viewed with the least amount of surveillance equipment 
possible on a limited budget. Furthermore, acquiring relevant 
data becomes much easier than surveillance monitoring is 
adaptable with numerous sensors like humidity/ digital 
temperature/ sonic/ air quality/ smoke sensors, etc., that may 
be used for diverse applications. Using the internet as a 
communication medium, the robotic car can function as both 
an autonomous and a manually operated vehicle. This 
multimodal robot was designed to sense the presence of an 
enemy, capture it on camera, and broadcast it live to an 
authorised person. Surveillance plays a big role while we're 
operating on the border, and there's a robot for that. This 
paper shows how to build a smart surveillance robot for 
military use utilising a Raspberry Pi for security. A Raspberry 
Pi field delivers a wireless command, which is received by an 
authorised user on a web page, and the robot moves as a result. 
The Raspberry Pi camera is used to stream the video. The 
Raspberry Pi is programmed in the Python programming 
language. The video streamed at a rate of up to 15 frames per 
second, according to the results of the trial. 
Keywords - Robots, Computer Vision, Raspberry Pi, IoT and GPS 
I.
INTRODUCTION
  This proposal objective is to utilise modern technologies, 
which have undergone a revolution, in the sphere of 
surveillance, especially for military and research initiatives. 
This concept can be realised by utilising embedded 
technologies, which aid in the development of a system 
capable of entering a remote location without the use of 
human resources. As a result, embedded systems, which are 
an integrated system of hardware and programme software 
that can be controlled remotely, are chosen. It discusses a 
smart surveillance system that uses a Raspberry Pi 3 and a 
webcam, as well as sensors for specific applications. The 
Raspberry Pi 3 is popular because it is adaptable and allows 
direct access to processor pins as GPIOs, making it ideal for 
developing your concept. The Raspberry Pi 3 is connected 
to a webcam to produce vision for the Bot. The raspberry pi 
uses the information obtained from the  
cam to control the bot and complete the desired work. Even 
while upgraded technologies play an important role in a 
variety of industries, defence systems have yet to reap the 
full benefits of these innovations.  
      The primary goal of this project is to use improvised 
approaches in defence, medical, and rescue missions. At this 
time, trespassers and insurgents are frequently infiltrating 
our country's restricted zones (across borders), and there is 
no accurate mechanism for identifying individuals. Humans 
and animals may be distinguished using image processing, 
and a tracking ID is provided separately to avoid false 
alarms for allowed access. The Mines are the most 
dangerous portion of the battlefield. Physically detecting 
mines opens up a slew of potential dangers. The 
employment of a remote monitoring bot minimises the 
danger of detecting and destroying mines. GPR (Ground 
Penetrating Radar) is one of the most recent micro 
technologies used to detect landmines, along with the use of 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (NMR) and 
other sound sensors. Controls for the arms are employed. As 
a surveillance application, it can also be used in rescue 
efforts. Compact bots capable of entering regions where 
personal contact is impossible are employed to gather 
information about those locations at aftermath for the 
natural and human made disasters. Our system assists for 
pre-monitoring areas, detecting location to an exact precise 
point using GPS, live image streaming through camera, and 
roving over any tough terrain. The bot's data is accessed via 
IoT, which makes the data more secure and authentic.  
II. PROPOSED STRUCTURE FOR HARDWARE
IMPLEMENTATION 
The goal of this project is to employ modern technologies, 
which have ushered in a revolution in the sphere of 
surveillance, especially for military and research initiatives. 
This concept can be realised by utilising embedded 
technologies, which aid in the development of a system 
capable of entering a remote location without the use of 
human resources. As a result, embedded systems, which are 
an integrated system of hardware and programme software 
that can be controlled remotely, are chosen. It discusses a 
smart surveillance system that uses a Raspberry Pi 3 and a 
webcam, as well as sensors for specific applications. The 
Raspberry Pi 3 is popular because it is adaptable and allows 
direct access to processor pins as GPIOs, making it ideal for 
developing your concept. The Raspberry Pi 3 is connected to 
a webcam to produce vision for the Bot. The raspberry pi uses 
the information obtained from the cam to control the bot and 
complete the desired work. 
462
978-1-6654-0816-5/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
2022 8th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Communication Systems (ICACCS) | 978-1-6654-0816-5/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICACCS54159.2022.9785152
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 15:05:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2022 8th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Communication Systems (ICACCS) 
 
Even while upgraded technologies play an important role 
in a variety of industries, defence systems have yet to reap the 
full benefits of these innovations. The primary goal of this 
project is to use improvised approaches in defense, medical, 
and rescue missions. At this time, trespassers and insurgents 
are frequently infiltrating our country's restricted zones 
(across borders), and there is no accurate mechanism for 
identifying individuals. Humans and animals may be 
distinguished using image processing, and a tracking ID is 
provided separately to avoid false alarms for allowed access. 
The Mines are the most dangerous portion of the battlefield. 
Physically detecting mines opens up a slew of potential 
dangers. The employment of a remote monitoring bot 
minimises the danger of detecting and destroying mines. GPR 
(Ground Penetrating Radar) is one of the most recent micro 
technologies used to detect landmines, along with the use of 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (NMR) and other 
sound sensors. Controls for the arms are employed. As a 
surveillance application, it can also be used in rescue efforts. 
Compact bots capable of entering regions where personal 
contact is impossible are employed to gather information 
about those locations in the aftermath through natural and 
human made disasters. Our system assists in pre-monitoring 
areas, detecting location to an exact precise point using GPS, 
live image streaming through camera, and roving over any 
tough terrain. The bot's data is accessed via IoT, which makes 
the data more secure and authentic. 
 
 
 
Fig. 1: Block diagram of Proposed Method 
A. Concept Design: 
     Through the USB 2.0 ports on the board, the Raspberry Pi 
3 Model B with 1 GB RAM is connected to a USB Webcam. 
The board's 64bit ARM V7 Quadcore processor is capable of 
processing the 24bit RGB video format captured by the 
webcam. For our data processing and interpretation, we use a 
full-size HDMI cable to link the Raspberry Pi 3 to the display. 
When the system is in a location where HDMI connections are 
not available, communication can be accomplished via IOT 
ideas. The information is delivered to the cloud via the wireless 
LAN on the board and then retrieved to our display. The 
Raspberry Pi 3 board is powered by a power bank that can 
deliver up to 2.4 amps. The DC motors that drive the robot's 
wheels are driven by 40 pin GPIO input. A 12 V DC supply 
powers the DC motor. After evaluating the data from the 
webcam, the Raspberry Pi 3 changed the input to the GPIOs at 
different times. 
 
 
B. Interfacing raspberry pi 3 with 10mp webcam 
 
   Python Idle 2 is the most popular framework for interfacing 
a Raspberry Pi 3 with a 10MP webcam with a resolution of 
640 x 480 pixels. Because an external webcam cannot be 
directly interfaced in Python idle, Open CV2 must be installed. 
The Raspberry Pi 3 (Model B) used features an arm 11 core 
architecture, 1GB RAM memory, and is powered by a 5V, 2A 
USB connection, with Raspbian OS booting from a microSD 
card. Frame rates of 40 frames per second and 20 frames per 
second are available on the webcam interface (VGA). The 
webcam produces video in 24-bit RGB format. Using a USB 
connector, the data is send to the Raspberry board. 
 
C. Communication of Raspberry Pi with User 
 
  For use of Users acknowledgement of any interrupt is to be 
made by the user there is need of remote accessibility of the 
board. To implement this concept of Internet of Things is used. 
Communication using IOT is more secure, fast and can 
control/monitor the robot from anywhere in the world. The 
video from the webcam is transmitted to the webserver which 
is connected to the cloud with specific IP address. This data 
can be accessed by any PC from the cloud server using the 
specific IP address. Users can control the bot from the control 
unit by sending interrupts to the bot through IOT in vice-versa 
of the method explained above. 
 
 
Fig. 2 Diagram for Methodology of communication 
Protocol 
463
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 15:05:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2022 8th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Communication Systems (ICACCS) 
 
D. 
The Raspberry Pi:  
 
The Raspberry Pi is a low-cost computer the width of a board 
that connects to a computer monitor or television through a 
standard mouse and keyboard. [2]. Regardless of its 
diminutive size, the Raspberry processor is adept of a wide 
range of tasks and functions similarly to a desktop computer, 
including Internet browsing, video game play, and word 
processing. Raspberry Pi, on the other hand it supports an 
open source languages like as Python and Java, that are 
compatible with any programming platforms. 
Fig.  3: Raspberry Pi 3 Board Features 
    Due to its superior performance and specs, Raspberry 
processor was preferred to other controllers like ARM and 
arduino for this prototype, allowing high computation 
applications to be used. The Raspberry Pi 3 is using in this 
prototype. This prototype was built on a Raspberry Pi 3. The 
features of the Raspberry Pi 3 are shown in Figure 3. GPIO 
ports and pins, complete External Memory card slot, audio 
jack pins and composite video ports, Ethernet pins, camera 
connector, display connector, High-Definition Multimedia 
Interface pins, Video Core and 3-Dimensional graphics core 
[1]. The Raspberry Pi Processor is linked to the Remote 
Controlled car to provide online video running through the 
camera output as well as Internet based remote controller of 
the RC car drive. The Raspberry Pi will be connected to the 
same network as the monitor, and the output data will be 
shown in a web portal. 
 
E. The Camera:  
   In this proposed project, the camera is a USB-based web 
camera [5] linked to the Raspberry Pi. Before installing the 
web camera, it is tested against a Raspberry processor well-
matched USB webcam [3] to guarantee that it will function 
properly with the Pi. Because the camera is linked to the Pi, 
the Pi may upload the collected real-time footage to the 
Internet over Wi-Fi. A web interface can be used to monitor 
online live video for surveillance or to remotely operate the 
car measure. 
 
F. Raspbian Jessie OS:  
    The Raspberry Pi runs on the Raspbian operating system. 
Raspbian is an unofficial Debian Wheezy port with compiler 
settings tweaked to provide optimised "hard float" code for 
the Raspberry Pi. For applications that rely heavily on floating 
point arithmetic operations, this results in much faster 
performance. Although the main contributors to Raspbian are 
Peter Green and Mike Thompson, it has greatly benefited 
from the actively engaging of the Raspberry community who 
want to get the most out of their gadgets. [7]. Raspbian Jessie 
is the operating system installed on the Raspberry Pi. 
 
G. Python:  
 Updates to numerous of the Raspbian-bundled applications 
are among the other unique aspects of Raspbian Jessie. 
Epiphany web browser, Sonic Pi all has new versions, as well 
as built-in Python apps. As a result, Python users don't need 
to install anything to access the file [8]. Python language is a 
simple and most significant object-oriented programming 
software that is similar to Java and Scheme, in terms of syntax 
and readability and makes use of English keywords. To 
communicate data from GPIO ports to Remote Control Car's 
motor, this project will use a Python application. 
 
H. Overall Activity Flow:  
 
   The Raspberry Pi based system's entire activity flow can be 
broken down into numerous components, as displayed in 
Figure 4. When the processor is on, it will automatically look 
for a Wi-Fi connection and interface with to the one that has 
been assigned to it. The USB based web camera has been 
instantly start capturing real time camera video. Before being 
uploaded to a web live server for streaming, the videos will 
be compressed. Simultaneously, the Pi will await human input 
or remote commands to controller the RC car's movement. 
. 
 
Fig.  4: Overall Activity Flow (Raspberry Pi)  
464
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 15:05:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2022 8th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Communication Systems (ICACCS) 
 
III. RESULT ANALYSIS & DISCUSSION 
The setup and configuration work that went into bringing 
all of the components together is detailed in this section. 
Images for the output snapshots are also provided in this 
section. 
 
A. Raspberry Pi Setup  
For ensure that every feature functions correctly the first 
time the Raspberry Pi 3 boots, several devices are required to 
set it up [2] 
.    
B. Camera Installation: 
    Motion, a programme that monitors the visual signal from 
cameras in order to give live streaming video, will be 
installed on the USB Webcams. It can detect motion by 
detecting if a substantial section of the image has moved. 
Motion may output JPG image format, PNG image format 
and MP4 video. Later all of the arrangement is finished, the 
online video sharing will be viewed directly through the 
browser using a web link [9].. Figure 5 shows a video feed 
seen in a web browser.The resolution of the image utilised in 
this project is the default format, is 360pixel width and 
240pixel height. MJPG Streamer could be installed and 
utilised to improve the camera's quality [9]. However, the 
frame per rate should be properly fix, else movie will stream 
far too quickly. Another option is to lower the frame rate, 
alter for video size, and use a high-quality web cam to 
troubleshoot for video's criteria. 
Fig.  5: Interfacing with Raspberry Pi  
 
C. OpenCV: 
    Face detection and recognition can be done with OpenCV, 
a computer vision framework. The robot uses a camera to 
perform face recognition, and we manually provide 
commands to the robot based on that. Unfortunately, the 
current binary version of OpenCV (version 2.3.x), which can 
be loaded via apt-get on the Raspbian operating system, is too 
old to include the facial recognition algorithms needed for 
this project. However, by obtaining, creating, and installing a 
newer version of OpenCV, you can access the facial 
recognition algorithms. 
D. Webpage Development: 
    The creation of a web page is a critical component of our 
effort to control a robot from afar. It will be important to 
create a single platform from which we will accessour robot. 
We may adjust the direction of the motor and the camera's 
position as well as monitor the video feed from the web page. 
It will be important to secure our website against 
unauthorised access. To keep it safe, we'll keep the IP address 
a closely guarded secret. When an authorised person wants 
access to the robot, he will go to that page and input the static 
IP address of the Raspberry Pi, and the authorised user will 
be granted access to the robot. 
 
   We use 000webhost to create our own website. We created 
our own website and posted all of the information about our 
robot on it, as well as our contact information, so that anyone 
who visits the page may learn about it and leave a remark on 
it. All of the data will be stored on the server. 
 
E. Prototype Development:  
 
     The task was done through the Remote Controlled car that 
delivers online live video sharing for surveillance purposes 
and can be operated remotely over the web link. Remote 
Controlled car to be controlled through Raspberry board, 
which interfaces to web server through Wi-Fi. A Universal 
Serial Bus camera is attached to the Pi to allow live video 
broadcasting. A car motor regulator is connected to 
Raspberry board to control car's movement. A web interface 
was developed to give the user with both video streaming and 
an RC controller panel. The user can watch live video while 
navigating the region by remotely managing the car's 
movement using this interface.  
 
 
Fig.  6: Hardware Implementation   
A test was performed for local access authorization in which 
an unauthorized locally connected user could not view the 
live broadcast and could not control the Remote-Control Car. 
Unauthorized access is displayed on a web error for such 
users. In another experiment, the Remote-Control car could 
only be operated by an authorized user who had the proper id 
465
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 15:05:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2022 8th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Communication Systems (ICACCS) 
 
and password, as well as access to the web browser from 
anywhere as long as the Pi was turned on.  
IV. CONCLUSION 
     In this study, we develop a smart surveillance robot for 
military use. With the help of this robot, we can determine 
the current state of the border area in real time without relying 
on any human source. The surveillance robot provides live 
streaming video in response to our commands. The Raspberry 
Pi development board is a low-cost, fully functional 
computing device that may be used for a wide range of 
purposes. Camera modules are also reasonably priced and can 
be used in security systems. We were able to make our 
product more flexible to future advances by using Python and 
OpenCV on the Raspberry Pi.. Using this proposed 
technology, our security officers will have a hand in detecting 
invaders. As parts of our border areas fall into high altitude 
locations, this robotic technology can also be deployed in 
high altitude areas where humans struggle to survive. The 
proposed robotic system can also be utilised to locate injured 
people in disasters such as earthquakes, building collapses, 
and mine areas, as well as serving as a spy robot. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  Shamanth G S and Ashwin Kashyap ‘‘face detection using Raspberry pi 
and python”, National Conference on Product Design, 2016. 
[2] N.V.K. Ramesh, S.C.Gaddam and HemaDhanekula, “Face Recognition 
Based Attendance Management System with Raspberry PI 2 using 
Eigen Faces Algorithm”, ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied 
Sciences, vol -11, 2016.  
[3] Gobhinath.S and Dineshkumar.V, “Accident and Emergency Informer 
Using GSM with Voice Support from SPOT Data”, International 
Journal of Programmable Device Circuits and Systems, Vol 3, no 3, 
2011. 
[4] Danwei, “Distributed Compressive Sensing Based Near Infrared and 
Visible Images Fusion for Face Recognition”, International Journal of 
Advance Research in Engineering, Science & Technologyvol.9, No.4, 
pp.281- 292, 2016.  
[5] Li Yongqiang and Panjin, ‘‘One sample image Recognition algorithm 
based on improved sub-pattern principle component analysis’’, IJSP, 
IPPR vol.8, pp.77-84, 2015. 
[6] Jeong-Sik Park, Gil-Jin Jang and Yong-Hoseo, “Efficient Head Pose 
Determination and its Application to face Recognition on Multi-Pose 
face DB”, International journal of multimedia and ubiquitous 
engineering Vol.11.No2 (2016).  
[7] M.Moghaddam and Saeed Meshgini, “Automatic face Recognition via 
Local Directional Patterns”, Journal of Artificial Intelligence in 
Electrical Engineering, vol.4, 2015.  
[8] G.Senthilkumar, K.Gopalakrishnan and S.Kumar, “Embedded Image 
Capturing System Using Raspberry PI System”, International Journal 
of Emerging Trends & Technology in Computer Science Vol. 3, Issue 
2, 2014. 
[9] G.Ghinea, R.Kannan and Suresh Kannaiyan, “Gradient orientation-
based PCA Subspace for Novel Face Recognition ”in IEEE Access, Vol 
2, 2169-3536 2014. 
[10] M.Angur, Jarman, Samiul Arshad and Mohammed.J.Islam, "An 
automated Bengali sign language recognition based on finger tip finder 
Algorithm", International Journal of Electronics & Informatics, 2015.  
466
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 15:05:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

