2024 Second International Conference on Advances  in Information Technology (ICAIT-2024) 
 
 
 
 
979-8-3503-8386-7/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE 
 
 
Interactive Image Processing: Design Of An AI 
Assisted Human Computer Interaction Logic Using 
Gesture Recognition Model Based On Logical Open 
CV Scheme 
 
 
A. Jaya Mabel Rani 
Department of CSE 
Saveetha School of Engineering, 
Saveetha Institute of Medical and 
Technical Sciences, Saveetha 
University, 
Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India. 
jayamabelrania.sse@saveetha.com 
 
Celine Kavida A 
Department of Physics  
Veltech Multitech Dr Rangarajan Dr. 
Sakunthala Engineering College,  
Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India 
celinearuldoss@gmail.com 
S. Sujatha 
Department of EEE 
Sri Sairam College of Engineering  
Bangalore, Karnataka,India  
sujasakthi22@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
L. Vinoth Kumar 
Department of Information Technology, 
RMK Engineering College, 
 Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India 
vk.it@rmkec.ac.in 
R Anbunathan 
Department of Mathematics 
SA Engineering college,  
Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.    
anbun.adhavan@gmail.com 
 
 
 
B. Shamreen Ahamed  
Department of CSE  
Sathyabama Institute of Science and 
Technology, 
 Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India 
shamreenahamedb@gmail.com 
Abstract—One method that can recognize hand gestures in 
real-time video is hand gesture recognition. A specific field of 
study is used to categorize the hand gesture. One of the 
difficult tasks in this study involving two main problems is the 
design of the hand gesture recognition system. The first step is 
to identify the hand. Making a sign that works for just one 
hand at a time is another challenge. The focus of this system is 
on developing a computer vision system that can detect, 
identify, and understand hand gestures, even when faced with 
tough circumstances such as variations in scale, orientation, 
position, and attitude. A variety of gestures, including 
numerical and sign language ones, must be implemented into 
this system for the development of this study endeavour to be 
successful. There are a lot of potential uses for this field, which 
provides a more organic and easy method for humans to 
interact with robots and system interfaces without the usage of 
additional hardware. Therefore, developing systems that can 
recognize individual human gestures and utilize them to 
transmit data or operate devices is the major objective of 
gesture recognition research as it pertains to Human-
Computer Interaction (HCI). This necessitates real-time 
gesture identification and lightning-fast, very robust hand 
detection for vision-based hand gesture interfaces. Using an AI 
algorithm, this study introduces a solution for real-time gesture 
detection called the Logical Gesture detection Model (LGRM). 
It is general enough to be applied in many different kinds of 
human-computer interactions. To verify that the suggested 
model is effective, it is cross-validated with the traditional 
method known as the Cascading Gesture Classification Model 
(CGCM). 
 
Keywords—Image Processing, Artificial Intelligence, AI, 
Human Computer Interaction, Gesture Recognition, OpenCV, 
LGRM, Gesture Classification, CGCM 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Everyday life includes systems that can recognize 
hand gestures in real-time videos, and one of them is hand 
gesture recognition [1]. A specific field of study is used to 
categorize the hand gesture. The project's goals include, 
among other things, the design of a system for hand gesture 
recognition. Computer vision has several essential and 
fundamental problems, one of which is the recognition of 
hand motions. Modern developments in media and 
information technology have made possible human-
computer interaction (HCI) systems that perform hand 
processing tasks, including gesture recognition and hand 
detection [2][3]. 
 
Hand processing systems begin by identifying and 
localizing the hand in the webcam's live feed [4]. Because of 
variations in size, position, orientation, and attitude, hand 
identification is problematic. The variation is further 
amplified by the fact that the room's lighting is of varying 
intensities. There are often many stages involved in hand 
detection and gesture identification, including picture 
capture, pre-processing, feature extraction, and gesture 
recognition. Acquiring images requires taking still pictures 
from a movie using a camera and saving them frame by 
frame. Color filtration, smoothing, and thresholding are all 
steps in the picture pre-processing pipeline that are applied 
to the collected photos. Gesture recognition uses feature 
extraction to identify hand gestures, while feature extraction 
2024 Second International Conference on Advances in Information Technology (ICAIT) | 979-8-3503-8386-7/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICAIT61638.2024.10690802
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:52:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2024 Second International Conference on Advances  in Information Technology (ICAIT-2024) 
 
 
 
 
979-8-3503-8386-7/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE 
 
 
uses hand images to extract characteristics such hand 
outlines [5][6]. The development of systems that can 
recognize individual gestures and use them as inputs or 
outputs is a key focus of gesture recognition research [7]. 
While hand posture refers to the hand's static structure, 
gestures denote the hand's dynamic movement, and both the 
spatial and temporal domains must be accounted for when 
modelling gestures [8]. 
 
One example is sign language; it's the most natural 
means of communication for the deaf community, but they 
still struggle to communicate with hearing people. Similar to 
how a spoken language's vocabulary consists of words, a 
sign language's vocabulary comprises of signs. Different 
countries use different grammars in sign languages; hence 
there is no universally accepted norm. For several reasons, 
including but not limited to making it possible for young 
children to engage with computers (via sign language 
recognition), the development of fast and accurate methods 
for translating sign language into text or speech has been a 
primary focus of Sign Language Recognition (SLR) 
systems. The two main schools of thought when it comes to 
hand gesture identification are vision-based and data glove 
techniques [9]. In order to develop a system that can 
recognize posture and gestures for usage in real-time 
applications, this study focuses on building a vision-based 
method. Since vision-based hand gesture recognition 
systems provide a more natural and easy method for humans 
to communicate with computers, they were the primary 
emphasis of the research. 
 
When interacting with a computer, hand gestures 
are a natural and reliable way to transmit data. While 
conventional input devices like keyboards, mice, joysticks, 
and touch screens do the job, the current system will feature 
an interface that is more suited to desktop or laptop 
computers, allowing users to perform hand gestures with the 
use of data gloves or a webcam to capture an image of their 
hand. Capturing and analyzing hands is the first stage in this 
gesture recognition process. In contrast, the vision-based 
approach only requires a camera, thereby detecting the real 
human-computer interaction without the need for any 
additional hardware. Constant backdrop, sometimes human, 
and lighting are additional obstacles for this method. Here, 
in addition to the recognition approaches, we detail the 
many procedures and algorithms that make up this system 
[10]. 
 
II. 
RELATED STUDY 
 
Digital mental health solutions that are efficient, 
user-friendly, cost-effective, as well as adaptive have been 
designed and developed in part via human-computer 
interface (HCI) [11]. However, there are worries about 
quality and safety since HCI has not been properly 
integrated into technology advancements. There is great 
promise for digital platforms and AI to enhance mental 
health care as well as suicide prevention services' capacity 
for prediction, detection, coordination, and treatment. 
Websites and mobile applications powered by AI are mostly 
used for self-help along with guided cognitive behavioral 
therapy (CBT) for mental health issues including anxiety 
and depression. Outdated, overburdened, or nonexistent 
mental healthcare systems may benefit from interactive AI's 
real-time screening and treatment capabilities. Challenges in 
using AI in mental healthcare include issues with 
accessibility, 
effectiveness, 
dependability, 
usability, 
security, ethics, appropriate training and education, and 
socio-cultural adaption. Digital phenotyping, immersive 
technologies, apps, and real-time 
machine learning 
algorithms are promising areas to watch out for. Improved 
and more rapid human-machine interaction and automation, 
more stringent evaluations of efficacy, and the adjunctive 
use of blended, hybrid, or phased care are all necessities. 
Assisting in the digital therapeutic alliance, identifying and 
resolving disparities in mental health treatment and suicide 
prevention, and designing and developing practical 
applications are all areas that might benefit from human-
computer interaction (HCI) modelling [11]. 
 
Product design in this age of fast progress must 
address not only functional and technical requirements, but 
also the psychological and emotional demands of consumers 
[12]. Traditional human-computer interaction interfaces 
were ill-equipped to handle modern users' demands; so, 
psychological design material must be included into modern 
HCIs. Consequently, this study proposes a research 
methodology for human-computer interaction interface 
design grounded on design psychology with the aim of 
enhancing the user experience. This study examines a few 
real-world issues with the design of human-computer 
interaction interfaces via the lens of design psychology, 
looking at these issues through the lenses of human behavior 
and perception. Afterwards, we look into the elements that 
Chinese users care about while using a human-computer 
interface and the percentage of distinct sensations in the 
human-computer information that people get. New needs for 
human-computer interaction interface design have emerged, 
according to the research. In order to usher in a new age of 
design psychology-based research on human-computer 
interaction interfaces, it is necessary to compile the relevant 
experimental data and findings [12]. 
 
The purpose of this research is to ascertain how 
human-computer interface design influenced the evolution 
of mobile phone technology [13]. Descriptive analysis was 
the method used by the researcher. In addition to 
highlighting the benefits of cell phones, such improved 
social interaction and faster application loading times, the 
results also highlight the drawbacks, like disturbed sleep and 
increased weariness, of this technology. The study also 
identifies HCI as a field that studies computer technology, 
with a focus on user interfaces, and the common problems 
that HCI faces, such as the fact that HCI designers have a 
hard time figuring out how to make sure their designs have 
good HCI. The study's authors urged more research into 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:52:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2024 Second International Conference on Advances  in Information Technology (ICAIT-2024) 
 
 
 
 
979-8-3503-8386-7/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE 
 
 
mobile phones and their respective platforms, usability 
testing of software and websites, and the proper 
qualification 
and 
training 
of 
users 
with 
cognitive 
impairments so that they can make better use of these tools 
[13]. 
 
It is widely believed that information and 
communication technology may help developing nations' 
socioeconomic situations improve [14]. The growth of 
underserved populations has been made possible, according 
to 
studies, 
in 
several 
ways 
by 
the 
improved 
telecommunications infrastructure. As an example of an 
actual ICT application, digital library systems address many 
unfulfilled demands in research institutions, scientific 
communities, and new innovations while also providing 
better solutions overall. The parallel database system has 
evolved into the digital library system's primary instrument 
for effective data processing as technology has progressed. 
Thus, the coordinator, the collection machine, and the query 
processor can finish the distribution, load, and maintenance 
operations by coordinating their communication in the 
parallel environment. This has a high degree of efficiency, 
saves a lot of time, helps the digital library meet user needs 
effectively, and satisfies the data performance requirements 
of the digital library. Additionally, the key problem in the 
parallel algorithm has been solved. The efficiency and 
effectiveness of this parallel approach are shown by the 
experimental findings [14]. 
 
Important input techniques in Human-Computer 
Interaction (HCI), including as gesture and voice 
recognition, have seen extensive application in VR in recent 
years [15]. Specifically, voice recognition and gesture 
recognition have accomplished groundbreaking research 
advances thanks to the fast growth of deep learning, AI, and 
other computer technologies. The primary search engines 
used for this project are Google Scholar and the Web of 
Science literature database. Nearly a thousand researches 
were chosen based on HCI and deep learning-related 
keywords including "intelligent HCI," "speech recognition," 
"gesture recognition," and "natural language processing." 
Afterwards, after screening over 500 research technique 
studies throughout the course of five years (2019–2022), 
100 papers were ultimately chosen to constitute the research 
material of this work. The present state of the HCI 
intelligent system is examined first, followed by a summary 
of the achievements in HCI regarding gesture and voice 
interaction, and finally, the benefits of deep learning are 
chosen for further study. The next section lays out the 
fundamentals of gesture interaction before reviewing the 
history of interaction between gesture and voice recognition. 
Also included are descriptions of some typical uses for 
voice recognition and gesture recognition in conjunction 
with one another. We conclude by looking at the state of the 
art in human-computer interaction as it relates to natural 
language processing. The results demonstrate the extensive 
use of intelligent HCI and deep learning in areas such as 
intelligent robot guidance, emotion identification, voice 
recognition, and gesture recognition. In related scientific 
disciplines, many other recognition algorithms were 
suggested 
and 
experimentally 
confirmed. 
Impressive 
recognition accuracy was attained when contrasted with 
interactive approaches that did not include deep learning. 
Improving user interfaces is a key function of context in 
voice-supported Human-Machine Interfaces (HMIs). Action 
recognition may be made much more accurate and precise 
by combining long short-term memory networks with 
convolutional neural networks. That is why additional 
sectors will be part of HCI's future application area, and 
even better things are on the horizon [15]. 
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
 
Everything revolves around the shape of the hand. 
Any line or surface that connects all the continuous points 
along its boundaries and has no straight or flat parts is said 
to have contours. The thresholding step is carried out prior 
to this one. Using a webcam, we capture a basic picture of 
the hand in RGB format. Producing a binary picture that 
details the hand's outline requires some preparatory work. In 
this case, the contour and convex-hull of the contour are 
determined using the binary picture. If you have a collection 
of points and want to draw a closed figure around them, the 
shortest possible outline is the convex-hull of that set. As if 
every point on the hand's contour falls inside the convex 
hull's bounds, it's drawn on both sides. The effect is the 
same as wrapping one's hand in a folded paper container. A 
flaw in the hand gesture becomes apparent when convex 
hulls are drawn on both sides of the hand's contour, fitting 
sets of contour points. To build the hull and include all of 
the contour points within, it makes advantage of maximum 
locations. When a convexity defect is present, it produces a 
vector of values. The following figure Fig.1 shows the flow 
diagram of the LGRM method. 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:52:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2024 Second International Conference on Advances  in Information Technology (ICAIT-2024) 
 
 
 
 
979-8-3503-8386-7/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE 
 
 
 
 
Fig.1 Flow Diagram of LGRM Method 
 
This method uses data collected from the convex 
hull to identify the palm's location and the hand's shape to 
identify the fingertip's location. This system's computing 
cost is minimal since the computation geometry algorithm is 
conducted. 
The 
proposed 
method 
Logical 
Gesture 
Recognition Model (LGRM), an alternative to the current 
Cascading Gesture Classification Model (CGCM), increases 
the reliability of hand identification. The following figure 
Fig.2 shows the proposed flow diagram. 
 
 
 
Fig.2 Proposed Flow Diagram 
 
Data 
gathering 
and 
pre-processing, 
data 
representation or feature extraction, and classification or 
decision-making are the three main components of any 
gesture recognition system design. The user's hand is 
detected and tracked by the system, which then extracts 
relevant hand information by segmenting the hand from the 
video picture. Using these attributes, we can determine the 
user's gesture. Prior to using the acquired instance vector for 
classification, the characteristics pertaining to a static 
gesture must be normalized. However, in order to classify a 
dynamic gesture, the resulting hand path is first tagged using 
a preset alphabet, producing a discrete vector of labels. This 
vector is then translated back to its origin and utilized for 
classification. An algorithm takes in each detected gesture 
and uses it to construct the command sequence; that is, it 
adds up all the gestures it receives until it finds a preset 
sequence described in the Command Language. 
 
(i) Capturing Images: In the first stage, we acquired the 
RGB picture (frame by frame) with the use of a camera and 
solely hand motions. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:52:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2024 Second International Conference on Advances  in Information Technology (ICAIT-2024) 
 
 
 
 
979-8-3503-8386-7/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE 
 
 
 
(ii) Pre-Processing: We have extracted the relevant region 
(also called the "Region of Interest") from the video stream 
rather than the whole frame in order to reduce the amount of 
time needed for calculations. Thus, we transform the area of 
interest into a grayscale picture by using image processing 
to transform the original color photos into grayscale. Once 
the processing is finished, the images are returned to their 
original color space.  
 
(iii) Hand Area Segmentation: This step enables the 
development of the system's functioning by removing 
superfluous data from the video stream, which is crucial for 
any process involving hand gestures identification. The first 
method relies on skin color; it's simple but effective, and it 
takes into account environmental light and the background's 
characteristics to identify the hand in a picture. In the 
second method, we use a hand shape to our advantage by 
capitalizing on the convexity concept while detecting hands. 
When learning to recognize a hand signal, the position of 
the hand is crucial. 
 
(iv) Extracting the Contour: The visible border of the item 
(the hand) in the picture serves to outline the contour. 
Important in form analysis and object recognition methods, 
the contour may also be a wave linking spots with 
comparable color values. 
 
(v) Identifying and Extracting Features: A collection of 
peaks that encompasses the hand area called the convex 
hull. Here, we need to establish the convex set principle, 
which states that any line connecting any two points on the 
hull is completely included inside it. Once the gesture has 
been identified, the desired action may be carried out. 
Movement recognition is an evolving process. Return to the 
first stage to accept another picture for processing, etc., after 
carrying out the specified instruction from the gesture. 
 
The three main parts of the framework are the 
Camera, Detection, and Interface components. The 
following figure Fig.3 shows the system architecture. 
 
 
 
Fig.3 System Architecture 
(a) The Camera Module: This is responsible for the actual 
taking of pictures, which it transmits to the detection module 
in the form of frames after interacting with various image 
markers. Cameras, data gloves, and hand belts are the most 
common ways to capture and identify input. 
 
(b) The Detection Module: This is responsible for 
processing images. Color conversion, noise reduction, 
thresholding, and other image treatment procedures are 
applied to the camera module's output before contour 
extraction. 
 
(c) The Interface Module: Tailoring the identified hand 
gestures to the corresponding actions is the responsibility of 
this module. After that, the appropriate application receives 
these instructions. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
 
There are typically three main steps in most gesture 
recognition algorithms. Identifying specific things inside 
digital still photos or moving movies is the primary goal of 
the object detection phase. At this point, improving the 
identification 
accuracy 
requires 
solving 
several 
environmental and picture difficulties in order to extract the 
contours or areas with precision. Issues with noise, contrast, 
resolution, and fluctuating brightness are common in 
images. These issues can be efficiently addressed by 
implementing better environmental conditions and camera 
technologies. Nevertheless, it is challenging to regulate the 
operation of the gesture recognition system in a real-world 
setting or when it is being developed into a product. So, to 
build an adaptable and strong gesture recognition system, 
the image processing approach is the way to go for solving 
these picture challenges. Realization of objects is the second 
phase. In order to recognize the motions, the detected items 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:52:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2024 Second International Conference on Advances  in Information Technology (ICAIT-2024) 
 
 
 
 
979-8-3503-8386-7/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE 
 
 
on the hands are recognized. Currently, the majority of 
study is focused on the following areas: effectively selecting 
classifiers; and distinct characteristics. The third step is to 
decipher the user's commands or actions by analyzing their 
successive movements. For improved gesture identification 
and to address issues with previous methods like the 
Cascading Gesture Classification Model (CGCM), a new 
algorithm dubbed the Logical Gesture Recognition Model 
(LGRM) is suggested. 
 
Figure 4 shows the input picture for the suggested 
method, and Figure 5 shows the pre-processing result for the 
same scheme. 
 
 
 
Fig.4 Input Image 
 
 
 
Fig.5 Pre-Processing 
 
The results of the feature extraction stage of the 
suggested method are shown in Figure 6, and the results of 
the edge identification stage of the suggested scheme are 
shown in Figure 7. 
 
 
 
Fig.6 Feature Extraction 
 
 
 
Fig.7 Edge Recognition 
 
In order to clearly evaluate the efficiency of the 
proposed scheme, it is cross-validated with the conventional 
Cascading Gesture Classification Model (CGCM) scheme. 
Following this, Figure 8 shows the classification stage 
outcome of the proposed approach, and Figure 9 shows the 
analysis of the prediction accuracy of the proposed scheme. 
Table-1 provides a descriptive representation of the same. 
 
 
 
Fig.8 Classification 
 
TABLE-1: PREDICTION ACCURACY ANALYSIS 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:52:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2024 Second International Conference on Advances  in Information Technology (ICAIT-2024) 
 
 
 
 
979-8-3503-8386-7/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE 
 
 
Epochs 
CGCM (%) 
LGRM (%) 
100 
86.34 
98.64 
125 
86.52 
96.52 
150 
84.31 
97.47 
175 
85.36 
96.39 
200 
87.61 
95.49 
225 
86.52 
97.67 
250 
85.45 
96.72 
275 
86.11 
98.31 
300 
86.13 
97.07 
325 
86.15 
97.05 
350 
86.17 
97.03 
375 
86.20 
97.01 
400 
86.22 
96.99 
 
 
 
Fig.9 Prediction Accuracy Analysis 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
 
According to the findings of the system, the 
development of hand gesture recognition using Python and 
OpenCV is made possible by using the theories of hand 
fragmentation and the hand recognition system that employs 
the Haar-cascade classifier. This is evident from the results 
of the system. In conclusion, this system has accomplished a 
number 
of 
objectives: 
first, 
it 
has 
developed 
a 
comprehensive system for detecting, recognizing, and 
interpreting hand gestures through computer vision using 
Python and OpenCV; second, it has generated sufficient 
examples of hand gestures and sign languages to satisfy the 
requirements of its name; and third, it has successfully 
implemented these objectives. In the future, this system will 
be able to carry out a greater number of motions, which will 
make it simpler for users with a variety of skin tones and 
palm sizes to carry out a greater number of functions. In the 
current technique, the right hand is only used inside a 
certain region of interest (ROI) in order to produce motions. 
In light of this, the desired technique enhancement can entail 
the utilization of both hands in order to carry out a variety of 
computer-based indicators. You have the option of using 
procedures that involve background subtraction for even 
better outcomes. It is anticipated that a Graphical User 
Interface (GUI) would be implemented in the near future, 
which will enable users to effortlessly turn motions into 
signs and numbers, and vice versa. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Jiaming Wang, et al., "Research Trends of Human–Computer 
Interaction Studies in Construction Hazard Recognition: A Bibliometric 
Review", Sensors, https://doi.org/10.3390/s21186172, 2021. 
[2] M. S. et al, "Smart Face Detection and Recognition in Illumination 
Invariant Images using AlexNet CNN Compare Accuracy with SVM," 
(ICIEM), 
London, 
United 
Kingdom, 
2022, 
pp. 
572-575, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICIEM54221.2022.9853078. 
[3] H Hristov, et al., "Generations of human-computer interactions: 
evolution, tendencies and perspectives", Journal of Physics: Conference 
Series, doi:10.1088/1742-6596/2339/1/012009, 2022. 
[4] G. R et al, "An Effective Copyright Management Principle using 
Intelligent Wavelet Transformation based Water marking Scheme," 
(ACCAI), 
Chennai, 
India, 
2022, 
pp. 
1-7, 
doi: 
10.1109/ACCAI53970.2022.9752516. 
[5] Daniela Quiñones, et al., "Understanding the customer experience in 
human-computer interaction: a systematic literature review", PeerJ Comput 
Sci, doi:10.7717/peerj-cs.1219, 2023. 
[6] Christos Troussas, et al., "A User-centric System for Improving 
Human-Computer Interaction through Fuzzy Logic-based Assistive 
Messages", 17th International Conference on Web Information Systems 
and Technologies, 2021. 
[7] C. Mansoor, G. Vishnupriya, A. Anand, S. Vijayakumar, G. Kumaran and V. 
Samuthira Pandi, "A Novel Framework on QoS in IoT Applications for Improvising 
Adaptability and Distributiveness," 2023 International Conference on Computer 
Communication and Informatics (ICCCI), Coimbatore, India, 2023, pp. 1-6, doi: 
10.1109/ICCCI56745.2023.10128257. 
[8] Mahmoud Hawamdeh, et al., "Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) 
Interventions 
for 
People 
with 
Disabilities", 
https://doi.org/10.32388/N2S82Q, 2023. 
[9] Hari Singh, et al., "Object Acquisition and Selection in Human 
Computer Interaction Systems: A Review", International Journal of 
Intelligent 
Systems 
and 
Applications 
in 
Engineering, 
https://doi.org/10.18201/ijisae.2019151248, 2019. 
[10] Sharefa Murad, et al., "CHR vs. Human-Computer Interaction Design 
for Emerging Technologies: Two Case Studies", Advances in Human-
Computer Interaction, https://doi.org/10.1155/2023/8710638, 2023. 
[11] Samuthira Pandi, V., Singh, M., Grover, A., Malhotra, J., Singh, S, 
“Performance analysis of 400 Gbit/s hybrid space division multiplexing-
polarization division multiplexing-coherent detection-orthogonal frequency 
division multiplexing-based free-space optics transmission system”, 
International Journal of Communication Systems, 2022, 35(16), e5310.. 
[12] Yina Liu, "Human-Computer Interface Design Based on Design 
Psychology", International Conference on Intelligent Computing and 
Human-Computer Interaction, DOI: 10.1109/ICHCI51889.2020.00009, 
2020. 
[13] Nidal Al Said, et al., "Assessment of Acceptance and User Experience 
of Human-Computer Interaction with a Computer Interface", International 
Journal 
of 
Interactive 
Mobile 
Technologies, 
DOI:10.3991/ijim.v14i11.13943, 2020. 
[14] Jun Cao, "Design and Implementation of Human-Computer Interaction 
System in Parallel Digital Library System Based on Neural Network", 
Scientific Programming, https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/9921551, 2021. 
[15] Zhihan Lv, et al., "Deep Learning for Intelligent Human–Computer 
Interaction", Appl. Sci., https://doi.org/10.3390/app122211457, 2022. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:52:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

