Deep Learning Based Hand Gesture Translation 
System 
 
Sk.Khaja Shareef1 
Associate Professor 
Department of Information Technology,  
MLR Institute of Technology 
Khaja.sk08@gmail.com 
I.V. Sai Lakshmi Haritha2 
Assistant Professor 
Department of Information Technology, 
MLR Institute of Technology 
pslharitha@gmail.com 
 
Y.Lakshmi Prasanna3 
Assistant Professor 
Department of Information Technology, 
MLR Institute of Technology 
prasanna.yeluri@gmail.com 
 
G.Kiran Kumar4 
Professor 
Department of Information Technology, 
MLR Institute of Technology 
ganipalli.kiran@gmail.com 
 
Abstract—  
Sign language plays an important role for the people who 
have the hearing and speech problems For the Non- verbal 
communication between the deaf-mute people. For the Kinetics 
gestures plays a crucial role in our day-to-day life. There are 
different sign languages that are available Hand Gesture 
Translation is one among them. The sign language is a collection 
of different Hand Gesture symbols and Each Hand Gesture 
symbol have special meaning. It is mostly used by the deaf-mute 
persons to express their views and thoughts very quickly with 
the normal people. Main problem with this system is very 
difficult to translate the symbols and required special training 
on sign language.  To overcome this problem we have 
implemented a Hand Gesture Translation System it provides an 
ability to interact with the machine efficiently. It will help the 
deaf-mute to express their feelings and views more effectively 
with the normal people. In this paper implemented software 
prototype that will automatically recognize the hand gestures 
with an accuracy of 93.4% for gesture Translation which will 
help the deaf and dumb people to interact easily with the normal 
people. The main aim of the project is to provide the easy way of 
communication between the normal people and the deaf-mute 
through gestures. 
 Keywords—Hand 
Gestures; 
Deep 
learning; 
Machine 
learning; Pre-Processing Image; Feature Extraction of Image; 
Image Processing; Deaf-mute. 
I INTRODUCTION 
The Sign language plays an vital role for the 
communication between the deaf-mute. Hand Gesture 
Translation System(HGT System) is one among them, which 
will help the deaf and dumb people to communicate with the 
normal people through different hand gestures. These hand 
gestures will help the deaf and dumb people to express their 
views and thoughts very quickly with the people. The output 
is produced in the form text so that the people can recognize 
what the deaf and dumb are saying. The sign language mostly 
reduces the communication gap between the deaf-mute and 
the other people. 
 There are two types of sign languages that are available 
one is Image based sign language and another one is Sensor 
based sign language. Sensor based sign language is very 
costly compared with the Image based sign language because 
Sensor based sign language is built with the Hardware 
components whereas Image based sign language is built 
through Camera, Our Laptop consists of inbuilt Camera 
which will help to capture the image objects very easily. 
Hand Gesture Translation System is the software prototype it 
uses the Laptop inbuilt camera for capturing the different 
hand gestures and produces the output in the form of Text. It 
is mostly used by people who have speech and hearing 
problems to speak with the people. Because sometimes the  
people cannot understand what deaf and dumb people are 
saying in that case these hand gesture Translation system will 
used because the output is produced in the form of text, 
which the normal people can able to read. One of the 
Advantage of Image based approach is not to wear the Hand 
Gloves, Helmet etc. Sign language identification is significant 
in many domain areas such as user-interface, Interaction, 
security and multimedia. There are two parts in sign language 
identification one is sign detection and another one is sign 
Translation. The system will use the web camera for 
capturing the hand gestures and after successfully capturing it 
will recognize those hand gestures and produces the output in 
the form of text. 
 In Machine Learning is useful in solving different real- 
time problems. This technology is mostly performs complex 
jobs such as classifying data, Translation of data, identifying 
data and predict the values. The basic idea of every machine 
learning project is to give a input data to the machine to 
generate a system which can be produce the result. Thus the 
obtained result offer the correct response with the new input 
or  generate predictions for the known information. The 
objective of our proposed system is to train ML algorithm in 
order to classify the different hand gesture images such as 
palm, fist. This method is also using deep learning and 
Tensor flow frame work . 
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics (ICOEI).
IEEE Xplore Part Number:CFP21J32-ART; ISBN:978-1-6654-1571-2
978-1-6654-1571-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
1531
2021 5th International Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics (ICOEI) | 978-1-6654-1571-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICOEI51242.2021.9452947
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 10,2026 at 04:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Word HGT System is done by deep learning using neural 
networks. [6] It uses a classification technique which comes 
under supervised learning. Supervised learning is the function 
which is trained with the named dataset. The named dataset  
contains  an input-output pairs. In this method the training as 
well as test datasets required. Classification algorithms are 
used for prediction in machine learning and works with 
labeled datasets. In classification, the computer program must 
train with the training dataset and after the training dataset 
will be divided into different classes. 
Deep learning is a one of machine learning algorithm 
utilizes multiple layers that process the data and also extract 
the high level features from them and produces a 
mathematical model[7]. The proposed system is able to 
categories the different hand signs, i.e A system, can learn the 
meaning of each sign and classifies them properly. 
Designing a model: 
  
Fig:1.1 Designing a model 
Convolutional layer will uses various of filters to the picture, 
the layer plays out certain numerical tasks in order to deliver 
one result. [8]Pooling layers are utilized in CNN to reduce the 
dimensionality of the picture. In a thick layer each hub in the 
layer is associated with the other hub in the first layer. 
II Literature survey 
Intrinsically there are two ways for the signal language 
understanding, one is vision based Translation and another 
one is sensor based gesture Translation. Sensor based 
approach includes wearing a helmet , wires etc. and lots of 
research should be done for the sensor based approach and 
are very costly. Also there is a disadvantage in the sensor 
based approaches is that continuously wearing of helmet and 
wires are impossible, so proposed project is focused on image 
processing methods Maintaining the Integrity of the 
Specifications[1] 
The In last few years there is a lot of work is done on 
gesture Translation and sign language Translation [2]. There 
are many paths or ways  for sign Translation which includes 
Hidden marcov model, Artificial neural network, Eigenvalue 
based Algorithm are one of the conspicuous accomplishments 
that were accomplished in the field of Hand gesture 
Translation is to remove correspondence hindrance between 
the deaf-mute and the ordinary individuals[3][4][5]. 
 After searching for different datasets in the internet, we 
did not find the dataset. To search of the dataset is also one of 
the biggest task, once we search for the dataset it is very easy 
to build the model according to our dataset. The sign 
language contains huge signs, hence we need a so much for 
conversion. Here we build a simple model using conventional 
neural network concept in deep learning. The architecture is 
to order the static pictures, we got a decent precision, after 
that we chose to add more experiments to our model, we 
additionally 
confronted 
a 
few 
requirements 
of 
the 
acknowledgment of our undertaking. 
 
III Feasibility Study 
The aftereffects of practicality investigation of a deep 
learning scheme for gesture based communication movement 
Translation are given in this paper. For motion Translation 
Deep learning and conventional classification schemes were 
utilized, and there are looked at[14][15]. In a Deep learning 
measure each edge of hand motion will be passed for include 
extraction. After extracting the feature it will recognize the 
extracted feature and produce the output[12][13]. 
 
 At this stage the design of the neural network and 
discretionary boundaries for deep learning have not been 
improved, it is checked that the precision of acknowledgment 
went from 97.2% for six signals. Though the performance of 
the conventional schemes are inferior, it is viewed as that 
these outcomes demonstrate the possibility of utilizing deep 
learning scheme for hand gesture identification 
Problem Definition 
Sign Language, which will convert the standard Sign 
Language to Text. This is a multi-use application for deaf and 
dumb people, which includes many forms of Sign Language 
and Gestures. 
Primarily  two methods are used for sign Identification Sight-
based and sensor-based Gesture Translation. Sensor-based 
methodologies like keeping gloves, wires, caps, and so on 
There is disadvantage in sensor based is wearing a gloves 
continuously is not possible. So image based is the simple 
technique for capturing the hand images[9][10][11]. 
 
VI Proposed System 
 
 
Fig:4.1:  Working Flow of the system 
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics (ICOEI).
IEEE Xplore Part Number:CFP21J32-ART; ISBN:978-1-6654-1571-2
978-1-6654-1571-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
1532
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 10,2026 at 04:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

 
In The proposed system we are having following modules  
i) Collect the Image : 
deaf-mute person has to sit in front of web camera and 
start communicating with sign language. Where web 
camera capture the images and forwarded to application. 
ii) Pre-Processing Image 
All the images are collected from web camera and these  
images are pre-processed noisy data. It will processes 
only hand gesture Image  
iii) Feature Extraction of Image 
The hand Image received from Image Pre-processing 
features of the Image is extracted such as sign represented 
by hand and these features are forwarded to Gesture 
Translation Hand Tracking system. 
iv) GRHT system 
 GRHT system is core of the system and it is a Deep 
learning application which contains the trained data sets 
to recognize the hand gesture. To train the data sets we 
use the Custom Gesture dataset of 6 gesture classes, 
individually intended for man- machine interfaces(MMI). 
GRHT system receives the data for feature extraction 
module and compares the hand gesture with available data 
in Input-output data set. If hand gesture matches with any 
of data in the data set the respective meaning of the hand 
gesture will be displayed on the screen to other people 
 
V Results 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 5.1 Screen short of working of application-1 
 
 
 
Fig 5.2 Screen short of working of application-2 
 
Use The Custom Gesture dataset of 6 gesture classes, 
individually intended for man- machine interfaces(MMI) and 
are recorded by webcam(Internal or external of any frame 
rate) using background elimination and background masking. 
There are 7800 images in total, including the testing and the 
training dataset which are staged at a reasonably dark 
background. Since the gesture images are recorded by using 
different webcams, there will be a change in the size of frame, 
so we cropped them to a standard size. The deep learning 
model is fed with 6000 images in total, 1000 respectively for 
each class and is validated with 600 images, 100 respectively 
for each class. 
Although this training set is a lot smaller compared to other 
datasets that are used in deep learning, using the background 
elimination concept helped us to remove the over fitting 
repercussion considerably. The state-of-art model that we 
used consists of 7 Conv3D layers and a max pooling layer 
associated with each layer. The architecture is also 
accommodated with a dropout of 0.75 to avoid over fitting. 
The final layer consists of the linear activation function, yet 
very commendable, the soft max is used. The approach we 
used performs state-of-art performance. The real time video is 
instantiated using the open cv module and each frame is 
collected, preprocessed and sent to the model for prediction. 
Human accuracy is reported as 93.4% for gesture Translation. 
 Limitations and Future Enhancement 
Limitations: 
 
It Replace mouse and Key board , can also Pickup 
and 
manipulate 
Virtual 
objects 
Navigate 
in 
virtual 
Environment 
Future Enhancement: 
It Enhance the Translation capability for various lighting 
conditions. we can achieve  more accuracy by implementing 
and identifying  more number of gestures applying gesture 
Translation for accessing internet applications 
 
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics (ICOEI).
IEEE Xplore Part Number:CFP21J32-ART; ISBN:978-1-6654-1571-2
978-1-6654-1571-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
1533
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 10,2026 at 04:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

VI Conclusion 
This Project is very useful for many people who have the 
hearing and the speech problems. This project is mainly 
useful for the deaf and dumb people who are unable to speak 
and are unable to listen, it will helpful for them. 
Sign languages are mostly used by the deaf and dumb 
people. These sign languages are mostly used to bridge the 
communication gap between the deaf-mute people and the  
Individuals. Gestures are used to provide a way for the 
computers to understand the human body language. Gestures 
will also play an important role for the communication 
between the visually impaired people with the normal people. 
 
VII References 
1.G. R. S. Murthy, R. S. Jadon. (2009). “A Review of 
Vision Based Hand Gestures Translation,” International 
Journal of Information Technology and Knowledge 
Management, vol. 2(2), pp. 405- 410 
2.S. Mitra, and T. Acharya. (2007). “Gesture Translation: 
A Survey” IEEE Transactions on systems, Man and 
Cybernetics, Part C: Applications and reviews, vol. 37 
(3), pp. 311- 324, DOI: 10.1109/TSMCC.2007.893280. 
3.Mokhtar M. Hasan, Pramoud K. Misra, (2011). 
“Brightness Factor Matching For Gesture Translation 
System Using Scaled Normalization”, International 
Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology 
(IJCSIT), Vol. 3(2). 
4.V. K. Verma, S. Srivastava, and N. Kumar, "A 
comprehensive review on automation of Indian sign 
language," IEEE Int. Conf, Adv. Comput. Eng. Appl.,Mar 
2015 pp. 138-142. 
5.H. Y. Lai and H. J. Lai, "Real-Time Dynamic Hand 
GestureTranslation," IEEE Int. Symp. Comput. Consum. 
Control,2014no. 1,pp. 658-661. 
6. M Anila and G Pradeepini, “Study of prediction 
algorithms for selecting appropriate classifier in machine 
learning.” Journal of Advanced Research in Dynamical 
and Control Systems 9, 257-268 
7. R Bandi, G Anitha “Machine learning based Oozie 
Workflow for Hive Query Schedule mechanism” 2018 
International Conference on Smart Systems and Inventive 
Technology. 
8. SG K.Nirosha, B. Druga Sri “Detection of Image 
Classifiers Using CNN in Machine Learning”, 2018 
Journal of Advanced Research in Dynamical and Control 
Systems (JARDCS) 10. 
9. Tsung-Ming Tai, Yun-Jie Jhang, Zhen-Wei Liao, Kai-
Chung Teng, and Wen-Jyi Hwang “Sensor-Based 
Continuous Hand Gesture Translation by Long Short-
Term Memory” IEEE Sensor Letters Vol.2,No.3,Sept 
2018. 
10. Minwoo Kim, Jaechan Cho, Seongjoo Lee and Yunho 
Jung “IMU Sensor-Based Hand Gesture Translation for 
Human-Machine Interfaces” Sensors 2019, 19, 3827; 
doi:10.3390/s19183827 
11. Yasen M, Jusoh S. 2019. A systematic review on hand 
gesture 
Translation 
techniques, 
challenges 
and 
applications. 
PeerJ 
Comput. 
Sci. 
5:e218 
http://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.218 
12. Kazuki Sakamoto, Eiji Ota, Tatsunori Ozawa, 
Hiromitsu Nishimura, Hiroshi Tanaka “Feasibility Study 
on Deep Learning Scheme for Sign Language Motion 
Translation” Complex, Intelligent, and Software Intensive 
Systems Proceedings of the 12th International Conference 
on Complex, Intelligent, and Software Intensive Systems 
(CISIS-2018) 
13. Jason Brownlee Deep Learning Models for Human 
Activity Translation Deep Learning for Time Series sept 
2018 
14. Mart´ın Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng 
Chen “TensorFlow: A system for large-scale machine 
learning” 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating 
Systems Design and Implementation 
15. Pramod Singh, Avinash Manure “Learn TensorFlow 
2.0” 
Apress, 
Berkeley, 
CA 
2020 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-5558-2 
 
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics (ICOEI).
IEEE Xplore Part Number:CFP21J32-ART; ISBN:978-1-6654-1571-2
978-1-6654-1571-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
1534
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 10,2026 at 04:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

