Real-time Hand Gesture Recognition Based on Deep Learning in
Complex Environments
Weixin Wu1, Meiping Shi1, Tao Wu1, Dawei Zhao1, Shuai Zhang1, Junxiang Li1
1. College of Artiﬁcial Intelligent Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, 410005
E-mail: fdwwxzxd@163.com, shimeip@163.com, wt.cs@163.com
Abstract:
Real-time hand gesture recognition in complex environments has many challenges, such as poor real-time
performances and robustness to environmental changes. This paper takes the hand gesture control of the unmanned
vehicle as the application background, and focuses on the gesture detection and recognition of video streams based on
deep learning in the complex environment. In this paper, we detect the hand in a complex environment by training the
ssd mobilenet model, and initialize the tracking with kalman ﬁlter. Then, we detect the hand keypoints by following the
architecture of Convolutional Pose Machines(CPMs), in order to obtain the belief maps for all keypoints that are used
as the train sets of Convolutional Neural Networks(CNNs). Finally, based on the results obtained by our classiﬁcation,
this paper proposes a method of multi-frame recursion to minimize the inﬂuences of redundant frames and error frames.
In this paper, eight kinds of gestures for controlling vehicle are identiﬁed. The experimental results show that our
method can successfully realize real-time hand gesture recognition in the video streams. The recognition accuracy can
reach 96.7%, and the average recognition speed reaches 12 fps, which basically meets the real-time requirements and
successfully applys to mobile terminals such as TX2 for engineering practice.
Key Words:
Ssd mobilenet; Convolutional Pose Machines(CPMs); Hand keypoints; Convolutional Neural Net-
works(CNNs); Multi-frame recursion.
1
INTRODUCTION
The development of artiﬁcial intelligence technology has
greatly promoted the process of commercialization of
driverless. At present, the autonomous driving technology
is not mature enough, and it still needs people to assist driv-
ing. Therefore, human-computer interaction technology is
the key to marketization of driverless. Now, the natural
human-computer interaction methods mainly include voice
interaction and gesture interaction etc. The voice interac-
tion technology is relatively mature at present, but it is still
susceptible to noise interference in the wild environment.
While the gestures contain a lot of information that can
convey semantics, emotions and conform to human daily
life habits, that are the research focus of human-computer
interaction technology.
With the rapid development of computer vision technol-
ogy, gesture recognition based on vision has low cost and
convenient remote interaction [1], so it is the focus of ges-
ture recognition. Vision-based gesture recognition meth-
ods can be roughly divided into two types: one is to use
Kinect,Leapmotion and other depth cameras [2] [3]or neu-
ral networks to obtain image depth information, such as po-
sition information of gestures; the other one is to split the
gesture from the background by traditional methods and
then extract the apparent image characteristics of the ges-
ture itself to perform gesture recognition.
There are several challenges in gesture recognition based
on the video streams:
This work is supported by National Nature Science Foundation of
China grant number 61790565.
1)The background is complex and easily affected by
light [4].
2)There will be a large number of redundant gesture pic-
tures.
3)The multi-view of the human hand and the inconsistent
shape size.
In this paper, there are two contributions : First, we pro-
pose to ﬁne-tune the ssd mobilenet model [5] [6] to train
our manually labeled data sets in order to detect the posi-
tion of the human hand in real time, and remove a part of
the complex background environment. Second, we add the
background class and multi-frame recursion: take the belief
maps of hand keypoints and background class as CNNs’ in-
put to get the classiﬁcation result; Then, the classiﬁcation
result is recursively calculated multiple frames and the ﬁ-
nal classiﬁcation result is obtained. Compared with the tra-
ditional classiﬁcation method, our method achieves good
performances.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II introduces the related works. Section III introduce
the system framework and details of our method. Discus-
sion and analysis of experimental results in Section IV. Fi-
nally, Section V summarize the paper and future work.
2
RELATED WORK
The video-based gesture recognition process can be
roughly divided into three steps:
1)Hand detection and segmentation.
The mainstream
direction of the traditional methods is to establish a skin
color model [7], segmenting the hand from the complex
background.
5950
978-1-7281-0106-4/19/$31.00 c⃝2019 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 11,2026 at 07:18:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Figure 1: System framework
2)Tracking of the hand. The purpose of tracking is mainly
to be able to accurately locate the position of the hand
in each frame of the vedio in real time, showing the
characteristic trajectory of the hand.
3)hand classiﬁcation and recognition.
The traditional
method is to match the candidate image with the template
image similarity, but this method is susceptible to complex
background.
YoungJoo Lee et al. [8] employ chain code and entropy
analysis to segment gesture regions and contours from
complex backgrounds.
The recognition accuracy can
reach more than 90%, but the inﬂuence of illumination
is obvious. The image depth information can effectively
solve the interference in the complex illumination back-
ground. And because of the development of deep learning
in recent years, researchers have focused more on the
image depth information of gestures.
Due to the low
accuracy of Kinect’s depth datas and the small detection
range of leapmotion, the researchers try to use the deep
learning method to output the position information of
hand keypoints [9] [10]. Oberweger M et al. [11]not only
apply CNNs to directly output the joint positions ,but also
combine a constrained prior hand model and a speciﬁc
reﬁnement stage to increase the joint localization accuracy.
Shih-En Wei et al. [12] design a sequential multi-stage
convolution network which directly operates on belief
maps from previous stages,that is now one of the best body
and hand 2D pose estimation methods. Tomas Simon et
al. [13] propose a multi-camera system to train the hand
keypoint detector that effectively solves the occlusion
problems of the keypoints, and output the 3D position of
hand keypoints.
In recent years, many methods focus on many spatio-
temporal features which capture shape, appearance, and
motion cues via image gradientsand optical ﬂow.
K.
Simonyan et al.
[14] propose a dual-ﬂow CNN that
combines spatial and temporal networks to verify that
CNNs trained on multi-frame dense optical streams with
smaller training data sets can get very good performances.
Tran et al. [15] employ deep 3-dimensional convolu-
tional networks (3D ConvNets) to learn spatiotemporal
features for videos.
In order to solve many challenges
of human computer interaction in real-world systems,
Pavlo Molchanov et al. [16] apply a recurrent three
dimensional convolutional neural network to detect and
classify dynamic gestures from multi-modal data. These
vision-based methods mostly require expensive depth
camera equipments or are difﬁcult to meet the real-time
requirements of engineering practices.
Our proposed
method can be effectively migrated to engineering practice
for the vehicle control.
3
METHOD
The gesture interaction control for unmanned vehicles
mainly faces two major challenges: the complex lighting
conditions and poor real-time performances. In order to
solve these problems, this paper ﬁrst proposes to train our
own hand detection data set based on the ssd mobilenet
model to obtain the detection box {cx, cy, w, h} of the
hand and initialize the hand position.
Then the square
patch is cropped at the hand position in the images, that
can avoid the full image search and speed up the recogni-
tion speed. Since the ssd mobilenet detection method does
not accurately detect the hand in every frame, we propose
a method of presetting the hand keypoints in the square
patch of images and using the Kalman ﬁlter to track the
hand keypoints. In order to obtain the characteristics which
are easy to classify, we follow CPMs to output the belief
map of each keypoint, that remove the inﬂuences of illu-
mination and other factors. Subsequently the image fea-
tures are extracted by CNNs. Then the multi-frame clas-
siﬁcation results are recursively counted to obtain the ﬁnal
results. The system framework includes: hand detection,
hand keypoints tracking, belief maps output, CNNs classi-
ﬁcation and multi-frame prediction (see Fig. 1).
3.1
Detect hand by ssd mobilenet model
This paper proposes a method of migration learning to
ﬁne-tune ssd mobilenet v1 coco model to detect hand.
The output of the convolutional layer in Single Shot
MultiBox Detector (SSD) is convolved with two dif-
The 31th Chinese Control and Decision Conference (2019 CCDC)
5951
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 11,2026 at 07:18:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Figure 2: Structure of CPMs
ferent 3×3 convolution kernels, one for the classiﬁed
conﬁdence and the other one for the localization of the
regression location called bounding-boxes {cx, cy, w, h}.
The ssd mobilenet model is based on SSD to replace
the Backbone network(VisualGeometryGroup16) with a
lightweight deep network model called mobilent that can
improve detection speed and suit engineering practice on
mobile terminals such as TX2.
We normalize each 640 × 480 image captured by the orig-
inal video stream to size 320 × 280. Then, we take each
320 × 280 image as the input of the trained ssd mobilenet
model, and integrate the offset value of each border and
the score of the classiﬁcation. We get the bounding-boxes
D1 {cx, cy, w, h} of the hand in the original frame(640 ×
480). The speed of ssd mobilenet model operates at 30
frames per second (FPS) on 4G GPU, which meets both
realtime and high precision.
3.2
Hand keypoint estimation and tracking
For the hand keypoint estimation, we follow the CPMs to
predict the conﬁdence map for each keypoint. We denote
each hand keypoint as Yp = (x, y) in the image,there
are 21 keypoints in a hand(see Fig.
3), denoted as
Y = (Y1, · · · , YP ), P = 21. We follow the center of
the bounding-boxes C(cx, cy) ,and preset 21 keypoints
Y ′ = (Y ′
1, · · · , Y ′
21) in the detection frame.Then we crop
the image area DCP Ms {cx, cy, w1, h1} with the area 2
× D2(the minimum area surrounding the 21 keypoints) as
input of the CPMs.
In the ﬁrst stage S1 of CPMs (see Fig. 2), we normalize
the image area DCP Ms {cx, cy, w1, h1} obtained from
the detection to size 256×256 as the original input image
of the CPMs. The feature map extraction is followed by
the ﬁrst prediction stage that produces all the beliefs of
part p + 1, B1 =

B1
1 · · · , B1
P +1

, P = 21, so that the
belief maps B1 ∈Rw1×h1×(P +1) for all the keypoints
can be obtained(P parts plus one for background), which
are 22 belief maps 32 × 32. Then, in all remaining stages
St, t ≥2, the belief maps of the previous stage St−1 is
connected to the image feature F, in order to produce a
more accurate new belief maps Bt.
After 6 prediction
stages, we adjust the belief maps 32 × 32 of 21 hand
keypoints to the original image size of 256 × 256. And
ﬁnally, the accurate new belief maps Bt ∈Rw1×h1×P and
the position Yc = (Y1, · · · , YP ) of 21 hand keypoints can
be obtained.
In order to carry out continuous position estimation for the
Figure 3: Deﬁnition of 21 hand keypoints
hand, this paper uses the Kalman ﬁlter to track 21 hand
keypoints.We take the preseted position of 21 keypoints
Y ′ = (Y ′
1, · · · , Y ′
21) as the values of the Kalman ﬁlter at
time instant k −1, and predict Y ′
k = Y ′
k−1 = Y ′ as the
position of keypoints at the current time instant k in Eqn
1. We take Yc = (Y1, · · · , YP ) obtained by CPMs as the
measured value at current time instant k.
The Kalman
gain Kk can be calculated by Eqn. 2 and Eqn. 3. We
further update and correct the position in Eqn. 4, in order
to obtain a more accurate new estimate Y r
k , which is
used to calculate and update the image region DCP Ms
{cx, cy, w1, h1}. If the tracking fails, we restart detection
and perform tracking initialization. Finally, we continu-
ously output the belief maps Bt ∈Rw1×h1×P of 21 hand
keypoints, thereby eliminating the inﬂuence of complex
background and ensuring the real-time performance. This
paper expects to extract features from these belief maps
for accurate classiﬁcation. For this classiﬁcation is easy to
obtain a large number of train sets, we must think of CNNs.
Y ′
k = A · Y ′
k−1 + B · uk−1.
(1)
Pk = A · Pk−1 · AT + Q.
(2)
Kk = Pk · HT · (H · Pk · HT + R)−1.
(3)
Y r
k = Y ′
k + Kk · (Yc −H · Y ′
k).
(4)
3.3
CNNs classiﬁcation and multi-frame prediction
The AlexNet network [17] consists of 5 convolutional
layers and 3 fully connected layers.
Compared with
other CNNs (LeNet,GoogLeNet), it has the advantages
of shallow network structure, few parameters and strong
generalization abilities. And the ﬁne-tuning method can
5952
The 31th Chinese Control and Decision Conference (2019 CCDC)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 11,2026 at 07:18:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

(a) Indoor pictures of 8 gestures
(b) Outdoor pictures of 8 gestures
(c) Redundant pictures generated during handover
Figure 4: Sample pictures of data sets.(Labels are deﬁned in turn as: go forward 0 , go backward 7, turn left 2, turn right 3,
speed up 4, slow down 5, stop 1 and hide 6 in (a) and (b))
make the AlexNet learn the characteristics of new data
sets fast, so this paper proposes a method to increase the
background class for ﬁne-tuning training by the AlexNet,
and multi-frame recursive results.
We divide the belief maps of the eight gestures into
eight types of images, each of which has 500 images
(train set: validation set = 8: 2).
The ﬁnal validation
accuracy is 100%, indicating that the ﬁne-tuning AlexNet
has a good effect of feature extraction.
How to solve
the problem of redundant frames in the video streams is
the key to real-time gesture recognition. We propose to
add a background class.
Firstly, the redundant frames
generated in the eight gesture switching processes are also
outputted their belief maps by CPMs, that is grouped into
a background class with a total data set of 600. Then we
retrain the AlexNet and collect total 9 classes(8 gestures
plus 1 background). After 30 generations of training, the
ﬁnal validation accuracy is 99.3%.
In this paper, the belief maps Bt ∈Rw1×h1×P outputted
by CPMs are used as the input of the trained AlexNet(see
Fig. 5) to obtain the label of each frame. We have consid-
ered that the background class is easily misjudged, and the
project actually requires 100% accuracy rate . Therefore,
this paper proposes a multi-frame recursive method to
eliminate redundant frames and error frames. We deﬁne
a series of frames produced by the video stream as
{S1, S2, · · · , SF } . Starting from the ﬁrst frame, we takes
the labels of n frames as a set L = {LS1, LS2, · · · , LSn}.
Then we count the class with the highest frequency of
the same label in set L as the result of these n frames.
Through our method, although the recognition speed drops
slightly, we effectively improve the accuracy and stability
of gesture recognition in the video streams.
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
Experiment platform and data sets
In engineering, we migrate the method to the mobile TX2
and placed a USB camera on top of the helmet.
This
Figure 5: Structure of trained CNNs
Figure 6: Gesture recognition helmet
Figure 7: Belief maps of 8 gestures
enabled us to implement a low-cost, easy-to-wear gesture
recognition helmet(see Fig. 6). We used the helmet to
collect image data and experiments.
Combined with our habits, we deﬁne 8 gestures:
go
forward, go backward, turn left, turn right, speed up, slow
down, stop and hide, for controling the unmanned vehicle.
In the complex indoor and outdoor environment: sunlight,
cloudy, and wild, we collect 4600 pictures of 8 gestures
switching between each other.
Each of these types of
gesture pictures is 500, and the total background class is
600. Part of the collection is shown in Fig. 4. And we can
get belief maps for 8 gestures with CPMs.(see Fig. 7)
The 31th Chinese Control and Decision Conference (2019 CCDC)
5953
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 11,2026 at 07:18:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 8: (a) is original pictures of hand. (b) is the effect of hand detection and keypoints tracking. (c): After CNNs
classiﬁcation, we get the label of each picture, we further carry out multi-frame recursion
Figure 9: During the switching process of gesture 6 and gesture 3, the background class 8 is misidentiﬁed as gesture 4, and
we use this method to eliminate the error frame.
Figure 10: Training loss curve
4.2
Hand detection model training
We manually labeled 1000 hand images in different
environments and poses as train set from our own data sets
(train set: validation set: test set = 7.6: 1.4: 1), when the
learning rate is 0.0005, after 60000 iterations, the total loss
stabilized at 1.211 (see Fig. 10) and the Mean Average
Precision (mAP) was 0.96.
4.3
Classiﬁcation result analysis
From the original picture to the ﬁnal result(see Fig. 8),
the average recognition speed of the experiment generally
ﬂoats at 10-13 fps, so we take the continuous 12 frames in
the process of gesture switching in the video streams for
Table 1: Comparison of different methods
Method
Single frame
classiﬁcation time (t/s)
Accuracy
Average
FPS
Hog+svm
0.15
87%
4.1
VGG19
0.023
97%
9.7
Ours
0.006
96.7%
11.6
analysis. After hand detection and keypoints tracking, we
use the belief maps obtained by CPMs to perform AlexNet
classiﬁcation and display the classiﬁcation results on the
belief maps. After many experiments, the number of the
redundant frames generated by gesture switching are about
1-3 frames at 10-13fps, so we recursively take n=5 frames
in order to minimize the impact of redundant frames. Even
with a very small number of misclassiﬁed frames, we can
exclude the effects in this way, as shown in Fig. 9.
4.4
Comparative experiment
We capture 300 video stream frames generated by switch-
ing between 8 gestures from the video streams as test sets.
This paper compares the traditional classiﬁcation method
hog+svm with the deeper network structure VGG19 than
Alexnet in the same test environment.
The traditional method is far less than the deep learn-
ing model in terms of average fps and accuracy, and it is
not possible to classify background classes and 8 gestures
very well. The VGG19 network is about the same as the
AlexNet in accuracy, but not as good as the AlexNet net-
5954
The 31th Chinese Control and Decision Conference (2019 CCDC)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 11,2026 at 07:18:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Figure 11: Red: accuracy of validation set. Green: loss
value of validation set. Yellow: loss value of train set
work on average fps. The comparative experimental results
of these three methods are shown in Table 1. When we ﬁne-
tune AlexNet, the effect is the best in learning rate 0.0006.
On the basis of ﬁne-tuning, the loss value of the train set
and validation set can easily drop to a low point, and the
convergence speed is faster(see Fig. 11).
5
Conclusion
This paper proposes a method for real-time recognition of
video streams based on deep learning in complex environ-
ments. It is applied to human-computer interaction con-
trol of vehicle in engineering. The ssd mobilenet model
is used to effectively detect the hand, and the Kalman ﬁl-
ter is used to track the hand keypoints. We use the CNNs
to classify the keypionts belief maps which are outputted
by the CPMs. The proposed algorithm has an accuracy of
more than 96% for gesture recognition in complex environ-
ments, effectively reduces the false alarm rates. The set-
ting of the background class and the multi-frame recursion
method make us more reliable in the practical application
of the project. The recognition speed achieves on the TX2
is 2fps, and the recognition accuracy is about 97%, which
basically meets the engineering practice requirements. In
our future work, we will focus on expanding our data sets
to make them more robust and improve the computational
efﬁciency of mobile devices such as TX2 for better real-
time performances.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Ueda, Y. Matsumoto, M. Imai, and T. Ogasawara, Hand
pose estimation for vision-based human interface, in IEEE
International Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive
Communication, 2001. Proceedings, 2002, pp. 473478.
[2] Z. Ren, J. Yuan, J. Meng, and Z. Zhang, Robust part-based
hand gesture recognition using kinect sensor, IEEE Trans-
actions on Multimedia, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 11101120, 2013.
[3] C. Keskin, F. Kra, Y. E. Kara, and L. Akarun, Real time
hand pose estimation using depth sensors, in IEEE Inter- na-
tional Conference on Computer Vision Workshops, 2011, pp.
12281234.
[4] E. Ohn-Bar and M. M. Trivedi, Hand gesture recognition in
real time for automotive interfaces: A multimodal vision-
based approach and evaluations, IEEE Transactions on In-
telligent Transportation Systems, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 2368
2377, 2014.
[5] W. Liu, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, C. Szegedy, S. Reed, C. Y.
Fu, and A. C. Berg, Ssd: Single shot multibox detector,in
European Conference on Computer Vision, 2016, pp. 21 37.
[6] A. G. Howard, M. Zhu, B. Chen, D. Kalenichenko, W. Wang,
T. Weyand, M. Andreetto, and H. Adam, Mo- bilenets: Efﬁ-
cient convolutional neural networks for mobile vision appli-
cations, 2017.
[7] H. Francke, J. Ruiz-Del-Solar, and R. Verschae, Real-time
hand gesture detection and recognition using boosted clas-
siﬁers and active learning, in Paciﬁc-Rim Symposium on Im-
age and Video Technology, 2007, pp. 533547.
[8] J. Lee, Y. Lee, E. Lee, and S. Hong, Hand region ex- trac-
tion and gesture recognition from video stream with complex
background through entropy analysis, Conf Proc IEEE Eng
Med Biol Soc, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 15131516, 2004.
[9] U. Iqbal, M. Garbade, and J. Gall, Pose for action - action for
pose, 2016
[10] V. Ramakrishna, D. Munoz, M. Hebert, J. A. Bagnell, and
Y. Sheikh, Pose machines: Articulated pose estimation via
inference machines, vol. 8690, pp. 3347, 2014.
[11] M. Oberweger, P. Wohlhart, and V. Lepetit, Hands deep
in deep learning for hand pose estimation, CoRR, vol.
abs/1502.06807, 2015.
[12] S. E. Wei, V. Ramakrishna, T. Kanade, and Y. Sheikh, Con-
volutional pose machines, pp. 47244732, 2016.
[13] T. Simon, H. Joo, I. Matthews, and Y. Sheikh, Hand key-
point detection in single images using multiview bootstrap-
ping, in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2017, pp. 46454653.
[14] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, Two-stream convolutional
networks for action recognition in videos, vol. 1, no. 4, pp.
568576, 2014.
[15] T. Du, L. Bourdev, R. Fergus, L. Torresani, and M. Paluri,
Learning spatiotemporal features with 3d convolutional net-
works, in IEEE International Conference on Computer Vi-
sion, 2015, pp. 44894497.
[16] P. Molchanov, X. Yang, S. Gupta, K. Kim, S. Tyree, and
J. Kautz, Online detection and classiﬁcation of dynamic
hand gestures with recurrent 3d convolutional neural net-
works, in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016,
pp. 42074215.
[17] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, Imagenet
classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks, in In-
ternational Conference on Neural Information Process- ing
Systems, 2012, pp. 10971105.
The 31th Chinese Control and Decision Conference (2019 CCDC)
5955
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 11,2026 at 07:18:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

