Gesture Recognition in Robotic Surgery with Multimodal 
Attention
Beatrice van Amsterdam,
Wellcome/EPSRC Centre for Interventional and Surgical Sciences (WEISS), University College 
London, UK
Isabel Funke,
Division of Translational Surgical Oncology, National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Partner 
Site Dresden, Dresden, Germany, and with the Centre for Tactile Internet with Human-in-the-Loop 
(CeTI), TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany
Eddie Edwards,
Wellcome/EPSRC Centre for Interventional and Surgical Sciences (WEISS), University College 
London, UK
Stefanie Speidel,
Division of Translational Surgical Oncology, National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Partner 
Site Dresden, Dresden, Germany, and with the Centre for Tactile Internet with Human-in-the-Loop 
(CeTI), TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany
Justin Collins,
Department of Urooncology, University College London Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, 
UK
Ashwin Sridhar,
Department of Urooncology, University College London Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, 
UK
John Kelly,
Department of Urooncology, University College London Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, 
UK
Matthew J. Clarkson,
Wellcome/EPSRC Centre for Interventional and Surgical Sciences (WEISS), University College 
London, UK
Danail Stoyanov
Wellcome/EPSRC Centre for Interventional and Surgical Sciences (WEISS), University College 
London, UK
This work is licensed under a CC BY 4.0 International license.
The work was supported by the Wellcome/EPSRC Centre for Interventional and Surgical Sciences (WEISS) [203145Z/16/Z]; 
the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) [EP/P027938/1, EP/R004080/1, EP/P012841/1]; the Royal 
Academy of Engineering Chair in Emerging Technologies scheme; the EPSRC i4Health CDT [EP/S021930/1]; the German Research 
Foundation (DFG, Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) as part of Germany’s Excellence Strategy - EXC 2050/1 - Project ID 
390696704 - Cluster of Excellence “Centre for Tactile Internet with Human-in-the-Loop” (CeTI).
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
Published in final edited form as:
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2022 July 01; 41(7): 1677–1687. doi:10.1109/TMI.2022.3147640.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Beatrice van Amsterdam: beatrice.amsterdam.18@ucl.ac.uk
Abstract
Automatically recognising surgical gestures from surgical data is an important building block of 
automated activity recognition and analytics, technical skill assessment, intra-operative assistance 
and eventually robotic automation. The complexity of articulated instrument trajectories and the 
inherent variability due to surgical style and patient anatomy make analysis and fine-grained 
segmentation of surgical motion patterns from robot kinematics alone very difficult. Surgical 
video provides crucial information from the surgical site with context for the kinematic data 
and the interaction between the instruments and tissue. Yet sensor fusion between the robot data 
and surgical video stream is non-trivial because the data have different frequency, dimensions 
and discriminative capability. In this paper, we integrate multimodal attention mechanisms in a 
two-stream temporal convolutional network to compute relevance scores and weight kinematic and 
visual feature representations dynamically in time, aiming to aid multimodal network training and 
achieve effective sensor fusion. We report the results of our system on the JIGSAWS benchmark 
dataset and on a new in vivo dataset of suturing segments from robotic prostatectomy procedures. 
Our results are promising and obtain multimodal prediction sequences with higher accuracy and 
better temporal structure than corresponding unimodal solutions. Visualization of attention scores 
also gives physically interpretable insights on network understanding of strengths and weaknesses 
of each sensor.
Index Terms
surgical gesture recognition; multimodal attention; surgical data science; robotic surgery
I Introduction
SURGICAL robots are now an established part of clinical practice, particularly in minimally 
invasive surgery, where surgeons especially benefit from the enhanced instrumentation, 
visualisation and ergonomics during the procedure [1]. In addition to advantages for the 
patient and clinical team, the surgical robot system is a complex platform and potentially 
captures large amounts of unique data from the surgical procedure that can be used to 
develop artificial intelligence solutions for the future surgical operating room benefiting 
from computer assisted interventions (CAI) [2]. Robotic systems in fact capture digital 
videos as well as instrument kinematic trajectories, instrument types and other system 
signals during surgical interventions, enabling more in-depth analysis of surgical motion and 
activity than with traditional instrumentation or video alone.
Surgical motion, activity and process understanding are fundamental concepts in surgical 
data science (SDS) and CAI, representing the cornerstone of various implementations of 
pre-, intra- and post-operative clinical support systems [4]. Analysis of surgical motion 
and robot kinematics is often based on decomposition into pre-defined action units, called 
“surgical gestures” or “surgemes” (Fig. 1), representing finegrained motion segments 
performed with a specific surgical purpose (e.g. grabbing the needle, pushing the needle 
through the tissue). Automatic segmentation of surgical demonstrations into fine-grained 
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 2
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

gestures finds application in technical skill assessment and development [3], [5], [6], as it 
allows a system to provide surgical trainees with quantitative and gesture-specific feedback, 
as well as surgical automation, where modular blocks of motion can be learnt, composed 
and reused more easily than long surgical tasks [7]. If performed in real-time, gesture 
recognition can also be exploited for any application based on context-awareness, such as 
workflow monitoring, error detection and intra-operative assistance [8], [9]. Linking surgical 
actions to patient outcomes can finally give new insights for strategy optimization [10].
Fine-grained analysis of surgical motion however presents significant challenges, due to 
the complexity of surgical trajectories and the presence of multiple independent variability 
sources, such as user-specific surgical style and skill level. The same gesture can also be 
used across different surgical phases and procedures, where contextual features such as 
instrument type and anatomical site are generally different but can hardly be exploited to 
discriminate between fine motions. The combination of these variability factors leads to 
alterations in the kinematic, temporal and sequential properties of surgical actions in a 
surgeon-, patient- and task-specific manner [11].
A promising but relatively unexplored strategy to enhance available recognition systems and 
improve their performance is represented by the integration of synchronous data streams 
recorded from the robotic platform, which often encode complementary information. 
Kinematic data, for example, represent the robotic system configuration and its motion 
in space, while endoscopic videos contain information about the environment, other tools 
and objects (e.g. needle, assistant’s tools) and their interaction in the surgical scene. Robust 
sensor fusion is however non-trivial because each sensor is subject to specific noise sources 
and has different predictive power in different contexts [12]. As an illustration, kinematic 
information is expected to return more accurate predictions when the view on the surgical 
scene is occluded or the surgical instruments move out of the camera’s field-of-view. On the 
other side, visual features are essential to discriminate gestures with similar motion pattern 
performed on different anatomical structures or with different surgical tools and objects. 
Balancing uni-modal information in a timely manner, that is with stronger focus on the 
most reliable modality at each time stamp, could thus be key to rectify unimodal prediction 
errors and obtain robust gesture recognition from multiple data sources [12], [13]. While 
previous work mostly relied on unimodal data or plain concatenation of uni-modal features, 
analysis of more complex interactions between visual and kinematic streams has been rarely 
investigated [14], [15], especially in real-case scenarios where robot kinematic information 
is not always freely accessible.
In this paper, we explore using attention mechanisms, which have gained much popularity 
in text data processing [16], to compute relevance scores and weight high-level kinematic 
and visual feature representations dynamically in time, aiming to aid multimodal network 
training and achieve effective sensor fusion between video and kinematics. The proposed 
attention modules are embedded in a two-stream temporal convolutional network, but can in 
principle be used with a variety of two-stream recognition systems.
We evaluate our proposed system on the JIGSAWS benchmark dataset [3], [11] and on a 
new dataset of suturing demonstrations from in vivo robotic prostatectomy interventions 
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 3
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

and we provide promising comparisons to the state-of-the-art. In our new clinical data, fine-
grained analysis and multimodal fusion are particularly challenging due to the complexity 
of the surgical environment and larger number of noise sources and variability factors. 
This represents an important first step towards translation of current research in gesture 
recognition systems and model deployment in real surgical scenarios, which has been 
hindered thus far by the lack of large and realistic open-source datasets essential for deep 
learning solutions.
In summary, our contributions include:
•
Integrating multimodal attention mechanisms in a surgical gesture recognition 
system with the aim of weighting kinematic and visual feature representations 
dynamically in time, thus aiding multimodal network training and achieving 
effective sensor fusion.
•
Introducing a new in vivo dataset for surgical gesture recognition made of 
suturing segments from robotic prostatectomy procedures. The video dataset 
and annotations will be made available for research purposes at https://
www.ucl.ac.uk/interventional-surgical-sciences/weiss-open-data-server.
•
Experimentally showing the effectiveness of attentionbased multimodal fusion 
on the JIGSAWS benchmark dataset as well as on our challenging in vivo data.
II Related Work
A Surgical Gesture Recognition - Temporal Models
Research on automatic recognition of surgical gestures has often drawn inspiration 
from state-of-the-art models for speech recognition and machine translation, as surgical 
demonstrations obey task-specific, probabilistic action grammars in a similar way as 
syntactic rules regulate the natural language flow. Probabilistic graphical models such as 
hidden Markov models [17] and conditional random fields [18], [19] have been extensively 
used in early research stages to learn such probabilistic grammar from video and kinematic 
data.
Current research is focused on more powerful solutions based on deep learning and in 
particular on temporal convolutional and recurrent models, which work efficiently on low-
dimensional input data such as kinematic trajectories or high-level visual features encoded 
with 2D [19] or 3D convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [20].
Temporal convolutions are often used in encoder-decoder networks where action predictions 
are generated simultaneously at all time stamps. Temporal Convolution Network (TCN) 
[21], [22] uses a cascade of temporal convolutions and pooling/upsampling layers to capture 
temporal correlations in the input data at multiple hierarchical levels. To avoid loss of 
fine-grained information, two-stream solutions process the data at two different temporal 
scales and merge information at multiple processing levels [23], [24]. The same issue can be 
tackled by stacking multiple layers of atrous temporal convolutions with increasing dilation 
factor, thus increasing the network temporal receptive field without pooling operations [25], 
[26].
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 4
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Recurrent models such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTMs) [27] and Multi-Scale 
Recurrent Neural Network (MS-RNN) [28], on the other side, are built around memory cells 
able to store long-term information of past observations. Hybrid models based on temporal 
convolutions and recurrent structures, either combined sequentially [29] or in parallel [14], 
have shown good recognition capabilities.
B Surgical Gesture Recognition - Sensor Fusion
Joint learning and fusion of multimodal data (video, kinematics and optical flow) for 
gesture recognition has been investigated in the literature [30], [31], giving insights that 
suggest the improved performance of multimodal models over their unimodal counterparts. 
Most related work approached sensor fusion through plain concatenation of uni-modal 
features [32]–[35], which could however be suboptimal due to differences in semantic 
and stochastic properties. Only a few studies have investigated more complex interactions 
between different data streams. Fusion-KV [14] consists of parallel recognition models 
operating on different data sources. Information fusion is performed at testing time, where 
individual predictions are weighted according to a voting scheme based on class-specific, 
uni-modal training performance. Class-specific weighting is however unsuitable to capture 
more detailed interactions and their evolution in time. Dynamic integration of high-level 
visual and kinematic embeddings has been achieved through a relational graph learning 
module (MRG-Net) [15], aimed at capturing joint knowledge to produce refined uni-modal 
embeddings. In a similar fashion, we use multimodal attention to seek timely multimodal 
cooperation and refine hidden representations for more accurate gesture recognition.
C Attention-based Temporal Multimodal Learning
Temporal Multimodal Learning (TML) [13] aims at simultaneously fusing multimodal 
information and modelling temporal dynamics in sequential data. Attention-based 
approaches for TML have been explored for video classification [13], [36] and video 
captioning [12], [37] from visual, motion and audio signals.
A simple but efficient solution consists in obtaining a global representation of each input 
sequence through independent temporal models (e.g. LSTM) with attention, and then 
fuse these high-level representations for video classification [36]. The advantage is that 
each modality independently learns to pay attention to different temporal segments, while 
multimodal interactions are still captured in late processing stages.
More advanced fusion strategies extend the attention mechanism by not only localizing 
relevant temporal windows, but also weighting the contribution of each data modality 
dynamically in time [12], [13], [37]. Dynamic weights can be assigned to each 
modality based on the agreement between the current input and the previous multimodal 
representation for video classification [13], or with all the previously generated words for 
video captioning [12], [37]. In a similar fashion, our model dynamically adjusts the relative 
contribution of each input stream to generate better multimodal representations.
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 5
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

III Datasets
A JIGSAWS Dataset
The JHU-ISI Gesture and Skill Assessment Working Set (JIGSAWS) [3], [11] represents the 
benchmark dataset for surgical gesture recognition. It contains synchronized kinematic and 
video recordings of elementary surgical tasks (suturing, knot-tying, needle passing) executed 
by eight different surgeons using the da Vinci Surgical System (dVSS) [38]. With focus on 
the suturing task, all 39 available demonstrations have been manually segmented into fine-
grained gestures according to a pre-defined dictionary of 10 action classes. Amendments to 
the original labels, rectifying 12 annotation errors, are reported in [39].
While JIGSAWS has been widely used by the research community for model development 
and comparison, it also shows some limitations which prevent the applicability of such 
methods to real-world surgeries. One is the limited size of the dataset (each demonstration 
only lasts around 1.5 minutes and contains approximately 20 gesture instances), which 
hinders robust training and testing of deep-learning-based recognition systems. Despite 
involving different users, lack of data diversity is apparent compared to real surgeries 
due to the standardised training environment and predetermined workflow structure, 
leading to similar instrument positions and directions of motion. Another problem is the 
lack of endoscopic motion and zoom, with all demonstrations observed from the same 
point of view. This leads to poor generalization to new endoscopic views in real-case 
scenarios, where camera motions are generally frequent. For technological advancement and 
translational research, future work requires testing on more realistic demonstrations with 
complex anatomies, camera motions, different illumination conditions, blood, specularities, 
occlusions and higher variability in action ordering and execution strategy.
B RARP-45 Dataset
In order to explore multimodal data integration in more challenging and realistic conditions, 
we collected a dataset of Robot-Assisted Radical Prostatectomies (RARP) performed by 
eight surgeons with different surgical seniority (experienced consultant, senior registrar 
and junior registrar) using a da Vinci Si Surgical System (Intuitive Surgical, Inc.) at 
the Westmoreland Street Hospital, London, UK, part of the University College London 
Hospitals NHS Trust1. Robotic radical prostatectomy is the surgery to remove the whole 
prostate gland and represents common treatment against clinically localised prostate cancer 
[40]. Its surgical workflow involves a first dissection phase, where the connection of the 
prostate to bladder and urethra are cut and the prostate is removed; the dorsal vascular 
complex (DVC), an array of veins and arteries that carry blood to the penis, is then sutured 
to keep bleeding under control (Fig. 2); finally the bladder and urethra are stitched back 
together. We carried out fine-grained analysis on the DVC suturing phase, which is more 
structured than preceding dissection phases and much less complex than the following 
anastomosis segment.
1The data for this study were collected with participants’ consent as part of clinical service evaluation and were shared anonymously 
with researchers within the team in order to provide independent assessment of surgical performance.
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 6
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The data consist of synchronized video and kinematics (Fig. 3) captured from the robotic 
platform at 60 Hz and 50 Hz respectively using the dVLogger (Intuitive Surgical, Inc.). 
Kinematic features include pose and joint angles of three Patient Side Manipulators (PSMs), 
two Master Tool Manipulators (MTMs) and the Endoscopic Camera Manipulator (ECM). 
Videos were recorded from the endoscopic camera held by the ECM and used in the 
labelling process as well as for recognition. A dictionary of 7 fine-grained bi-manual 
gestures and a background class (Table I) was designed in collaboration with expert 
surgeons to guide manual segmentation of DVC suturing demonstrations from 45 different 
interventions. Annotations were created by a trained engineer as there was no discrepancy 
between clinical and non-clinical understanding of the surgical gestures employed in this 
study.
Different trials show considerable variability in terms of total duration (Fig. 4a), as well as 
action count (Fig. 4b), ordering and kinematic properties. Such diversity is only partially 
operator-dependent, reflecting different surgical style and robotic surgical experience, but 
it is also linked to real-case variability factors such as patient-specific anatomical structure 
and tissue response (e.g. unexpected or excessive bleeding, which could prompt multiple 
gesture attempts or alter the surgical strategy). Other variability factors and noise sources 
which hinder robust gesture recognition in real-case scenarios include the presence of 
camera motions, changes of illumination, specularities, smoke and blood (Fig. 5). Given 
the endoscope proximity to the suturing site, surgical tools often fall out of the camera field-
of-view or their line-of-sight is interrupted by obstructions or self obstructions, especially 
during interactions with the surgical assistant, which brings additional tools to the surgical 
scene and often leads to altered kinematic trajectories.
IV Methods
A Unimodal streams
Our multimodal system is based on two parallel unimodal streams operating on high-level 
feature sequences derived from the original video and kinematic data (see Section IV-C). 
Each stream is a temporal convolutional network (TCN), composed of a contracting part 
(encoder) and an expansive part (decoder) (Fig. 6). The encoder consists of a cascade of 
temporal convolutions and pooling layers operating directly on the input time series, aimed 
at modelling kinematic or visual information at larger temporal scales and increasing levels 
of abstraction. Starting with input sequence X(0) ∈ ℝF(0) × T(0), where F(0) is the input 
feature dimension and T(0) is the total sequence length, the intermediate feature sequence 
X(l) ∈ ℝF(l)×T(l) at layer l ∈ [1, L] is computed at each time step t as:
Xt
(l) = f W (l) ∗Xt −c
2 −1:t + c
2
(l −1)
+ b(l)
(1)
X(l) = MaxPooling X(l), s .
(2)
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 7
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Here, F(l) is the number of feature maps at layer l, T(l) is the length of the sequence at layer 
l, W(l) ∈ ℝF(l) × c × F(l-1) and b(l) ∈ ℝF(l) represent the convolutional filter parameters at layer 
l, c is the kernel size, f is the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU), Xt −c
2 −1:t + c
2
(l −1)
 is a temporal section 
of the previous layer’s activation, X(l) ∈ℝF(l) × T(l −1) is the temporal convolution output 
and X(l) ∈ ℝF(l) ×T(l) is the max pooling output with stride s, where T(l) = T(l −1)
s
. When 
real-time evaluation is required, acausal convolutions (equation 1) are replaced with causal 
convolutions:
Xt
(l) = f W (l) ∗Xt −c −1:t
(l −1)
+ b(l) .
(3)
The decoder uses temporal convolutions and upsampling layers to gradually bring the data 
back to their original temporal resolution for frame-wise classification.
We also draw inspiration from temporal U-Net [41] and introduce shortcut connections 
between the two stages, where features from corresponding layers in the encoder and 
decoder are concatenated to allow the propagation of low level contextual information to the 
high level layers.
After each max pooling and feature concatenation layer, channel-wise feature normalization 
[21] as well as temporal dropout are employed for regularization.
B Multimodal sensor fusion
1) Baseline I - Concatenation TCN (C-TCN)—In order to fuse the two unimodal 
representations, the last layers from the kinematic and video streams are concatenated and 
projected through a fully-connected layer with softmax activation function to obtain action 
predictions.
2) Baseline II - Ensemble TCN (E-TCN)—Alternatively, multimodal fusion can be 
obtained with plain ensemble of the two unimodal models, that is training the two streams 
with average unimodal loss and taking their average prediction probabilities as the final 
multimodal prediction.
3) Multimodal Attention TCN (MA-TCN)—Video and kinematic data carry 
complementary information which could be useful to understand each action’s internal 
dynamics. They are also subject to different noise sources that often manifest erratically. 
Recognition of surgical actions could then be improved by highlighting or penalizing the 
contribution of each modality dynamically in time. Building on E-TCN and C-TCN, we 
derive frame-wise reliability weights for each stream using multimodal attention. During 
training (Fig. 7), the last decoder activation Xu ∈ ℝF(L) × T(0) of each unimodal stream u ∈ 
{K, V} is transformed into Pu ∈ ℝC×T(0) to match the number of classes C:
Pu = Softmax W uXu + bu ,
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 8
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

(4)
where Wu and bu are linear projection parameters. Pu is then compared to the corresponding 
one-hot-encoded label sequence Y ∈ ℝC×T(0) through scaled dot-product attention [16], 
where Yt ∈ ℝC×1 represents the frame-wise attention queries and Put ∈ ℝC×1 the frame-wise 
attention keys:
Sut Y , Pu = Y t
⊤Put
C , 0 ≤t ≤T(0) .
(5)
The resulting scores Su ∈ ℝ1 ×T(0) measure the similarity between unimodal predictions and 
corresponding ground truth at each time-stamp and are used as reliability weights to balance 
the relative contribution of different modalities. After normalization [12]:
Su
′ =
eSu
∑ueSu,
(6)
the generated weights Sut
′  are thus multiplied with the outputs of the corresponding stream 
Xut, representing the frame-wise attention values. Multimodal action predictions Pm ∈ 
ℝC×T(0) are then obtained by concatenation of the weighted outputs Sut
′ Xut from the two 
streams followed by a fully-connected layer with Wm and bm parameters and softmax 
activation function:
SKV t = SKt
′ XKt ∥SV t
′ XV t , 0 ≤t ≤T(0)
(7)
Pm = Softmax W mSKV + bm .
(8)
It is worth noting that computation of attention weights is performed for each frame 
individually, thus allowing online processing of the input sequences when causal temporal 
convolutions are employed in the unimodal streams.
C Input embeddings
Both unimodal streams operate on high-level feature sequences derived from the original 
data. As for JIGSAWS, we followed the majority of related work to aid comparability and 
used high-level visual features FV
(0) = 128  extracted from the raw video frames with a spatial 
CNN [19] along with smoothed and normalized selection of kinematic signals (positions, 
linear velocities and gripper angles) recorded from the two PSMs FK
(0) = 28 .
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 9
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The RARP-45 raw data were processed in a similar manner. Kinematic signals (positions, 
orientations and joint angles) recorded from two out of three PSMs FK
(0) = 69  were 
smoothed and normalized. High-level spatial features FV
(0) = 512  were extracted from the 
original video frames with ResNet18 [42] fine-tuned on the task of gesture recognition. 
Fine-tuning was performed on the training data via cross-validation, in order not to observe 
any test sequence during feature extraction.
Both datasets were down-sampled to 5Hz to reduce data redundancy and computation load.
D Training and inference
The goal of our network is to optimize predictions from both unimodal streams and 
simultaneously exploit the third multimodal branch to down-weight noisy features that 
could not be rectified with unimodal training due to sensor-specific noise and limitations. 
We therefore trained our network using a weighted combination of unimodal (Lk, Lv) and 
multimodal (Lkv) cross-entropy losses:
L = Lkv Pm + w1 ∗Lk PK + w2 ∗Lv PV
(9)
where w1 and w2 represent balancing weights for the unimodal losses. Loss values around 
the gesture boundaries were down-weighted to compensate for smooth transitions and 
annotation uncertainty (see Section V-B).
As for inference, it is not possible to use action labels in order to obtain attention 
scores. We thus monitored the recognition scores on the validation sets to decide 
when to stop attention-based training, and then fine-tuned the uni-modal branches using 
average unimodal loss without attention, conjecturing that attention-based pre-training could 
improve feature robustness and increase recognition accuracy. After fine-tuning, inference 
could be performed readily as in our baseline.
V Experiments and Results
A Evaluation protocol
1) JIGSAWS Dataset—We used the standard Leave-One-User-Out (LOUO) cross-
validation setup, consisting of eight validation folds featuring all trials performed by the 
same user. The LOUO setup penalizes overfitting to user-specific features and it is useful to 
evaluate model generalization to different surgeons. As no independent test set is available, 
the network performance was defined as the average accuracy over crossvalidation splits.
2) RARP-45 Dataset—We first divided the dataset into two parts with balanced class 
proportions, one for training (about 80%) and one for testing (about 20%) (Fig. 4c). Given 
the limited dataset size, we further divided the training set into 4 sub-sets and performed 
cross-validation for parameter tuning, estimating the optimal number of training epochs. The 
entire training set was then used to re-train the network and evaluate its performance on the 
unobserved test set.
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 10
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

3) Evaluation metrics—Results were analysed based on three most common evaluation 
metrics: accuracy, Edit score and F1@10 score. Accuracy is used to test frame-wise 
recognition performance, but it is not appropriate to assess temporal properties of the 
generated predictions, which might show similar accuracy but large qualitative differences. 
Edit and F1@10 scores are therefore used to evaluate network understanding of action 
ordering and task structure. While Edit score represents a distance between true and 
predicted label sequences, assessing action ordering without timing, F1@10 additionally 
examines the temporal overlap between predictions and ground truth segments of the same 
class. Detailed description of the evaluation metrics and their implementation details are 
reported in [43].
B Implementation details—For both datasets we used a 3-layer encoder-decoder video 
stream with output dimensions {64, 96, 96}{96, 64, 64}and a 2-layer kinematic stream with 
dimensions {64, 96}{96, 64}, both with max pooling stride s =2 and dropout rate p = 0.3. 
Temporal convolutions were performed at each time step (t) from t — 24 to t + 25 (kernel 
size c = 50) in acausal experiments, and from t — 24 to t (kernel size c = 25) in causal 
experiments. symmetric windows of temporal weights Wtrans = [1,0.9,0.5,0.5,0.9,1] were 
centered around each transition point and multiplied with the loss samples, while both w1 
and w2 balancing weights were heuristically set to 0.25. optimization was performed with 
the Adam optimizer (α = 0.9, β = 0.98) and a learning rate of 0.0005.
The network was implemented in PyTorch 1.5.0 and trained on NVIDIA Tesla V100-DGXS 
GPU.
C Results on JIGSAWS
1) Acausal experiments: We first performed acausal experiments to evaluate our
network’s best possible performance. Results of the ablation study are reported in Table 
II. Following [15], we trained each configuration three times with different initial seeds and 
recorded average scores for each validation split. We then reported the mean and standard 
deviation of the performance metrics across all 8 validation splits.
Loss down-weighting around the transition points (Wtrans) led our model to higher 
segmental scores, so we used it to train all the models. While our multimodal baselines 
(E-TCN, C-TCN) already showed better results compared to both unimodal streams (V-TCN 
and K-TCN), further improvement was obtained with multimodal attention (MA-TCN). 
In order to support our analysis statistically, we first used Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to 
verify if the cross-validation score vectors were normally distributed; as the scores were not 
normally distributed, we compared MA-TCN to the two multimodal baselines using two-
sided Wilcoxon signed rank test with α = 0.05 cutoff for significance. Results demonstrated 
a significant difference in accuracy with C-TCN, and a significant difference in all the scores 
with E-TCN.
Examples of MA-TCN prediction outputs before fine-tuning and corresponding attention 
weights, aligned with ground truth and unimodal predictions, are shown in Fig. 8 Green 
boxes highlight instances where MA-TCN correctly enhances information from the most 
reliable modality at each time-stamp, recovering missed segments (a), improving boundary 
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 11
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

adherence (b) or ignoring spurious segments (d). In few instances it is even able to rectify 
simultaneous classification errors (c). In other instances, however, MA-TCN’s performance 
is limited by the accuracy of the strongest modality (yellow box). An example of failure 
mode is highlighted in red, where higher weight is assigned to the weakest modality.
The interaction between video and kinematic predictions and corresponding attention 
weights sometimes finds physical interpretation, as illustrated in Fig. 8d. While gesture 
G6 (orient needle) is visually similar to G3 (transfer needle) and can benefit from higher 
kinematic attention to prevent misclassification, gestures G1 (position needle) and G2 (push 
needle through tissue) have similar kinematic properties when multiple adjustment motions 
are performed during G2. Placing the focus on visual cues to identify when the needle tip is 
inside the tissue can be helpful to identify the boundary between the two gestures.
Analysis of per-class F1-scores (Fig. 9) further confirms the observed behaviour, as MA-
TCN scores are generally better than both modalities or at least better than the weakest 
modality. Gestures G7 and G8 are under-represented and thus remain very difficult to 
recognize. It is finally worth noting that MA-TCN generally shows better understanding 
of action ordering and task structure, which is only marginally reflected in the frame-wise 
evaluation scores (global and perclass accuracy).
2) Comparison with related work: We compared acausal MA-TCN with related work
aimed at optimizing multimodal fusion of video and kinematic data (Table III) for surgical 
gesture recognition. For fair comparison, we re-tested our network against the original 
label sequences (without rectification of the annotation errors) and reported new scores. 
Despite reporting lower average accuracy, MA-TCN shows superior performance in terms 
of segmental scores (Edit), indicating better ability to retrieve missing segments or delete 
spurious predictions from different data modalities. Moreover, [14] and [15] use more 
complex baselines with three unimodal streams (two for the kinematics and one for the 
video) embedding both temporal convolutions and recurrent cells. Similar strategies could 
help to improve MA-TCN’s overall accuracy.
3) Causal experiments: We repeated our ablation study in a causal scenario, where
temporal convolutions are causal (equation 3) and predictions at each time stamp are only 
function of past and current data samples, thus allowing realtime application. MA-TCN still 
outperforms all unimodal and multimodal baselines (Table IV), with statistically significant 
difference in accuracy with respect to both C-TCN and E-TCN. Segmental scores show 
the largest drop compared to acausal recognition, as knowledge of near-future dynamics 
in acausal frameworks helps to regularize the predictions’ structure. While helping to 
improve the recognition accuracy, the use of multi-modal attention could not significantly 
compensate for the structural uncertainty in causal scenarios.
D Results on RARP-45—We performed acausal experiments on the RARP-45 dataset 
to evaluate our network’s performance in a more challenging real-case scenario. As reported 
in Table V, MA-TCN outperforms all the baselines in accuracy and F1@10 score on the test 
set.
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 12
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Fig. 10 shows examples of MA-TCN prediction outputs before fine-tuning and 
corresponding attention weights, highlighting successful and unsuccessful modality 
integration. As represented in the normalized confusion matrix (Fig. 11), a relevant 
percentage of the prediction errors falls at the gesture boundaries, where manual annotations 
are generally less accurate. Less frequent gestures such as G1 and G6 are sometimes missed 
and integrated into their temporally proximal segments (G0, G2 or G4 for G1, G4 or G7 
for G6). Gesture G5 is recognized very well, but it only appears in a single test sequence. 
More data are needed to mitigate such strong class imbalance and perform robust training 
and evaluation.
Multimodal per-class F1-scores (Fig. 12) outperform both modalities for almost all classes. 
The visual stream is in most cases less robust than the kinematic stream, but the integration 
of low-level feature extraction through end-to-end training could partially compensate for 
the gap in performance.
VI Conclusion
In this paper, we investigated using multimodal attention mechanisms to aid training of a 
two-stream network for surgical gesture recognition and achieve effective sensor fusion. 
The contribution of robot kinematics and visual information is balanced dynamically in 
time based on individual predictive power, resulting in combined prediction sequences with 
higher accuracy and better temporal structure. Visualization of attention weights also gives 
physically interpretable insights on network understanding of strengths and weaknesses of 
each sensor and modality.
Unlike related work, we tested our system on suturing demonstrations from real surgical 
interventions, where the complexity of the surgical environment and larger number of 
noise sources and variability factors makes fine-grained analysis and multimodal fusion 
particularly challenging. This is especially valuable for surgical-data-science translational 
research and for understanding the utilization of gesture recognition systems on real surgical 
data.
Method improvement is however needed to compensate for strong class imbalance in the 
available datasets, affecting the detection of infrequent classes, and to improve overall 
recognition accuracy on real surgical data, which is currently far from deployability levels. 
More real surgical data will also be collected to mitigate the problem, including different 
surgical phases (e.g. urethrovesical anastomosis) to introduce contextual data variability.
Surgical action characterization and definition of unambiguous gesture dictionary is another 
open problem itself [44], especially for bimanual operations. Available datasets like 
JIGSAWS have treated surgical demonstrations as singleaction sequences peformed by 
either robotic arm, ignoring the motion of the other arm. While this allows for faster 
labelling and simpler recognition models, it creates uncertainty when different gestures are 
performed simultaneously. In future work we aim to resolve such ambiguity with multi-label 
analysis and parallel recognition of right and left gestures, which is burdensome but more 
accurate and can account for action compositions [6]. Robust understanding of bimanual 
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 13
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

workflow and cooperation can help assessing surgical skill and is fundamental to achieve 
automation of complex action sequences in real surgical scenarios. Annotation variability 
studies based on multiple observers will also be performed to assess annotation accuracy and 
harmonize label sequences.
Beyond its limitations, the method also offers various possibilities of expansion and 
improvement. Similar attention modules could be placed on top of different layers to achieve 
adaptive sensor fusion at multiple abstraction levels. New data streams could also be added 
to enrich action representation and explore more complex multimodal interactions, using 
either new sensors (e.g. system event information) or new data streams automatically derived 
from available data (e.g. optical flow, semantic visual features, separated right and left 
instrument kinematics).
Future work will be finally aimed at integrating low-level visual feature extraction through 
end-to-end training, which is generally difficult on small datasets like JIGSAWS, as well as 
exploring similar attention mechanisms in the spatial [45] and temporal [26] domains.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank Intuitive Surgical, Inc. for sharing the kinematic data used in this paper under Collaboration Agreement.
References
[1]. Moorthy K, et al. Dexterity enhancement with robotic surgery. Surgical Endoscopy and Other 
Interventional Techniques. 2004. [PubMed: 15216862] 
[2]. Chadebecq F, Vasconcelos F, Mazomenos E, Stoyanov D. Computer vision in the surgical 
operating room. Visceral Medicine. 2020; 36 (6) 456–462. DOI: 10.1159/000511934 [PubMed: 
33447601] 
[3]. Gao, Y; , et al. JHU-ISI Gesture and Skill Assessment Working Set (JIGSAWS): A Surgical 
Activity Dataset for Human Motion Modeling; Modeling and Monitoring of Computer Assisted 
Interventions (M2CAI) - MICCAI Workshop; 2014. 
[4]. Maier-Hein L, et al. Surgical data science-from concepts to clinical translation. arXiv preprint. 
2020; arXiv:2011.02284 doi: 10.1016/j.media.2021.102306 [PubMed: 34879287] 
[5]. Vedula SS, et al. Analysis of the structure of surgical activity for a suturing and knot-tying task. 
PloS one. 2016; 11 (3) e0149174 doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149174 [PubMed: 26950551] 
[6]. Chen J, et al. Use of automated performance metrics to measure surgeon performance during 
robotic vesicourethral anastomosis and methodical development of a training tutorial. The 
Journal of urology. 2018; 200 (4) 895–902. [PubMed: 29792882] 
[7]. Nagy TD, Haidegger T. A dvrk-based framework for surgical subtask automation. Acta 
Polytechnica Hungarica. 2019. 61–78. 
[8]. Yasar, MS; Alemzadeh, H. Real-time context-aware detection of unsafe events in robot-assisted 
surgery; Proc of the IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN); 2020. 
385–397. 
[9]. De Rossi, G; , et al. Cognitive robotic architecture for semi-autonomous execution of manipulation 
tasks in a surgical environment; Proc. of the IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and 
Systems (IROS); 2019. 7827–7833. 
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 14
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

[10]. Schlomm T, et al. Full functional-length urethral sphincter preservation during radical 
prostatectomy. European urology. 2011; 60 (2) 320–329. [PubMed: 21458913] 
[11]. Ahmidi N, et al. A Dataset and Benchmarks for Segmentation and Recognition of Gestures 
in Robotic Surgery. IEEE Trans on Biomedical Engineering. 2017; 64 (9) 2025–2041. DOI: 
10.1109/TBME.2016.2647680 [PubMed: 28060703] 
[12]. Hori, C; , et al. Attention-based multimodal fusion for video description; Proc. of the IEEE Int. 
Conf. on computer vision; 2017. 4193–4202. 
[13]. Yang, X; Ramesh, P; Chitta, R; Madhvanath, S; Bernal, EA; Luo, J. Deep multimodal 
representation learning from temporal data; Proc. of the IEEE conference on computer vision 
and pattern recognition; 2017. 5447–5455. 
[14]. Qin, Y; , et al. Temporal segmentation of surgical sub-tasks through deep learning with multiple 
data sources; Proc. of the IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA); 2020. 371–377. 
[15]. Long Y-H, et al. Relational graph learning on visual and kinematics embeddings for accurate 
gesture recognition in robotic surgery. arXiv preprint. 2020. arXiv:2011.01619 
[16]. Vaswani A, et al. Attention is all you need. arXiv preprint. 2017. arXiv:1706.03762 
[17]. Varadarajan, B; Reiley, C; Lin, H; Khudanpur, S; Hager, G. Data-derived models for 
segmentation with application to surgical assessment and training; Proc. of the Int. Conf. on 
Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention; 2009. 426–434. 
[18]. Lea, C; Vidal, R; Hager, GD. Learning convolutional action primitives for fine-grained action 
recognition; Proc. of the IEEE Int. Conf. on robotics and automation (ICRA); 2016. 1642–1649. 
[19]. Lea, C; Reiter, A; Vidal, R; Hager, GD. Segmental spatiotemporal cnns for fine-grained action 
segmentation; Proc of the European Conference on Computer Vision; 2016. 36–52. 
[20]. Funke, I; Bodenstedt, S; Oehme, F; von Bechtolsheim, F; Weitz, J; Speidel, S. Using 3d 
convolutional neural networks to learn spatiotemporal features for automatic surgical gesture 
recognition in video; Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention; 2019. 467–475. 
[21]. Lea, C; Flynn, MD; Vidal, R; Reiter, A; Hager, GD. Temporal convolutional networks for action 
segmentation and detection; Proc. of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition; 2017. 156–165. 
[22]. Lea, C; Vidal, R; Reiter, A; Hager, GD. Temporal convolutional networks: A unified approach to 
action segmentation; Proc of the European Conference on Computer Vision; 2016. 47–54. 
[23]. Lei, P; Todorovic, S. Temporal deformable residual networks for action segmentation in videos; 
Proc. of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition; 2018. 6742–6751. 
[24]. Wang, J; Du, Z; Li, A; Wang, Y. Atrous temporal convolutional network for video action 
segmentation; Proc. of the IEEE Int. Conf. on Image Processing (ICIP); 2019. 1585–1589. 
[25]. Wang, T; Wang, Y; Li, M. Towards accurate and interpretable surgical skill assessment: A 
video-based method incorporating recognized surgical gestures and skill levels; Proc. of the Int. 
Conf. on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention; 2020. 668–678. 
[26]. Zhang, J; , et al. Symmetric dilated convolution for surgical gesture recognition; Proc. of the Int. 
Conf. on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention; 2020. 409–418. 
[27]. DiPietro R, et al. Segmenting and classifying activities in robot-assisted surgery with recurrent 
neural networks. Int journal of computer assisted radiology and surgery. 2019; 14 (11) 2005–
2020. [PubMed: 31037493] 
[28]. Gurcan, I; Van Nguyen, H. Surgical activities recognition using multi-scale recurrent networks; 
2019. 2887–2891. 
[29]. Ding L, Xu C. Tricornet: A hybrid temporal convolutional and recurrent network for video action 
segmentation. arXiv preprint. 2017. arXiv:1705.07818 
[30]. Zappella L, Haro BB, Hager G, Vidal R. Surgical gesture classification from video and kinematic 
data. Medical image analysis. 2013; 17 (7) 732–45. [PubMed: 23706754] 
[31]. Sarikaya D, Guru KA, Corso JJ. Joint surgical gesture and task classification with multi-task and 
multimodal learning. arXiv preprint. 2018. arXv:1805.00721 
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 15
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

[32]. Murali, A; , et al. Tsc-dl: Unsupervised trajectory segmentation of multimodal surgical 
demonstrations with deep learning; Proc. of the IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation 
(ICRA); 2016. 4150–4157. 
[33]. Zhao H, Xie J, Shao Z, Qu Y, Guan Y, Tan J. A fast unsupervised approach for multi-modality 
surgical trajectory segmentation. IEEE Access. 2018; 6: 56411–56422. 
[34]. Lea, C; Hager, GD; Vidal, R. An improved model for segmentation and recognition of fine-
grained activities with application to surgical training tasks; Proc of the IEEE winter conference 
on applications of computer vision; 2015. 1123–1129. 
[35]. Qin Y, Allan M, Yue Y, Burdick JW, Azizian M. Learning invariant representation of tasks for 
robust surgical state estimation. arXiv preprint. 2021. 
[36]. Long, X; , et al. Multimodal keyless attention fusion for video classification; Proc. of the AAAI 
Conf. on Artificial Intelligence; 2018. 
[37]. Xu, J; Yao, T; Zhang, Y; Mei, T. Learning multimodal attention lstm networks for video 
captioning; Proc. of the 25th ACM Int. Conf. on Multimedia; 2017. 537–545. 
[38]. Guthart, GS; Salisbury, JK. The intuitive/sup tm/telesurgery system: overview and application; 
Proc. of the IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA); 2000. 618–621. 
[39]. van Amsterdam, B; Clarkson, MJ; Stoyanov, D. Multi-task recurrent neural network for surgical 
gesture recognition and progress prediction; 2020. 1380–1386. 
[40]. Ficarra V, Cavalleri S, Novara G, Aragona M, Artibani W. Evidence from robot-assisted 
laparoscopic radical prostatectomy: a systematic review. European urology. 2007; 51 (1) 45–56. 
[PubMed: 16854519] 
[41]. Wang F, Song Y, Zhang J, Han J, Huang D. Temporal unet: Sample level human action 
recognition using wifi. arXiv preprint. 2019. arXiv:1904.11953 
[42]. He, K; Zhang, X; Ren, S; Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition; Proc. of the IEEE 
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition; 2016. 770–778. 
[43]. van Amsterdam, B; Clarkson, M; Stoyanov, D. Gesture recognition in robotic surgery: a review; 
IEEE Trans. on Biomedical Engineering; 2021. 
[44]. Meireles OR, et al. Sages consensus recommendations on an annotation framework for surgical 
video. Surgical endoscopy. 2021; 35 (9) 4918–4929. [PubMed: 34231065] 
[45]. Wang, F; , et al. Residual attention network for image classification; Proc. of the IEEE 
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition; 2017. 3156–3164. 
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 16
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Fig. 1. 
Surgeme examples in phantom and real surgical environments: (a) positioning needle tip 
on insertion point, (b) pushing needle through the tissue, (c) pulling needle out of tissue. 
Snapshots on top from JIGSAWS [3].
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 17
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Fig. 2. 
The dorsal vascular complex (DVC), an array of veins and arteries that carry blood to the 
penis, is sutured to keep bleeding under control during radical prostatectomy procedures.
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 18
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Fig. 3. 
The RARP-45 dataset consists of synchronized video and kinematic data recorded from 
the da Vinci Si Surgical System during robotic radical prostatectomy surgery. Manual 
segmentation into fine-grained bi-manual actions was carried out on the DVC suturing phase 
of the procedure.
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 19
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Fig. 4. 
RARP-45 statistics. (a) Task duration variability (reported in seconds). Average duration 
is about 5 minutes, with large variability ranging from about 2 to 12 minutes. (b) Class 
distribution per sequence. Each bin represents the median class frequency over interventions, 
and error bars mark the 25th and 75th quantiles. Class G5 is absent in more than 75% of the 
interventions. (c) Train and test class distribution. Absolute frequencies are reported on the 
bins. Relative frequencies are homogeneous across all classes.
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 20
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Fig. 5. 
Examples of variability factors and noise sources which hinder robust gesture recognition in 
real-case scenarios: (a) environment variability due to patient-specific anatomical structure, 
(b) changes of illumination, (c) presence of blood, (d) tools out of view, (e) occlusions and 
self-occlusions, (f) interactions with surgical assistant.
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 21
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Fig. 6. 
Unimodal baseline. A cascade of temporal convolutions and pooling layers to encode the 
input sequence at increasing levels of abstraction is followed by temporal convolutions and 
upsampling layers to gradually bring the data back to their original temporal resolution 
for frame-wise classification. Shortcut connections are introduced between encoding and 
decoding stages, where features from corresponding layers are concatenated to allow the 
propagation of low level contextual information to the high level layers. After each max 
pooling and feature concatenation layer, channel-wise feature normalization as well as 
temporal dropout are employed for regularization.
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 22
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Fig. 7. 
MA-TCN schematic. Starting from our two unimodal baselines, we derive frame-wise 
reliability weights for each stream using multimodal attention. During training, the output 
of each unimodal stream is compared to the corresponding one-hot-encoded label sequence 
through dot-product attention. The resulting scores are used as reliability weights to balance 
the relative contribution of different modalities. Action predictions are obtained by weighted 
concatenation of the final layers from the two streams followed by a fully-connected layer 
with softmax activation function.
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 23
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Fig. 8. 
Examples of MA-TCN prediction outputs before fine-tuning and corresponding attention 
weights (gray scale representation, white = 0.65, black = 0.35), aligned with ground 
truth and unimodal predictions. Green boxes highlight instances where MA-TCN correctly 
enhances information from the most reliable modality at each time-stamp, recovering 
missed segments (a), improving boundary adherence (b), ignoring spurious segments (d) 
or rectifying simultaneous classification errors (c). In yellow we highlight when MA-TCN’s 
performance is limited by the accuracy of the strongest modality. The red box shows 
an example of failure mode, where higher weight is assigned to the weakest modality. 
(e) Physical interpretation of unimodal classification errors and corresponding attention 
weights. While gesture G6 (orient needle) is visually similar to G3 (transfer needle) 
and can benefit from higher kinematic attention to prevent misclassification, gestures G1 
(position needle) and G2 (push needle through tissue) have similar kinematic properties 
when multiple adjustment motions are performed during G2. Using visual information to 
identify when the needle tip is inside the tissue leads to improved recognition.
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 24
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Fig. 9. 
Per-class F1-scores on the JIGSAWS dataset.
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 25
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Fig. 10. 
Examples of MA-TCN prediction outputs before fine-tuning and corresponding attention 
weights (gray scale representation, white = 0.65, black = 0.35), aligned with ground truth 
and unimodal predictions on the RARP-45 test set. The green box shows an example where 
MA-TCN correctly enhances information from the most reliable modality and outperforms 
both unimodal predictions, while the yellow box shows an example where MA-TCN’s 
performance is only better than the weakest modality. The red box shows an example of 
failure mode.
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 26
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Fig. 11. 
Normalized confusion matrix on the RARP-45 test set.
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 27
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Fig. 12. 
Per-class F1-scores on the RARP-45 test set.
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 28
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 29
Table I
RARP-45 dataset gesture list
ID
Gesture description
Count
G0
Background class
189
G1
Picking-up the needle
213
G2
Positioning the needle tip
535
G3
Pushing the needle through the tissue
500
G4
Pulling the needle out of the tissue
486
G5
Tying a knot
25
G6
Cutting the suture
35
G7
Returning/dropping the needle
71
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.

 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 30
Table II
Ablation study on JIGSAWS dataset - Acausal.
Accuracy
Edit
F1@10
K-TCN
83.8 (5.4)
86.3 (5.7)
90.4 (4.0)
V-TCN
83.7 (6.1)
87.4 (6.1)
91.9 (4.0)
C-TCN
86.1 (5.3)
90.5 (5.4)
93.9 (3.6)
E-TCN
86.2 (5.2)
89.4 (5.0)
93.1 (3.5)
MA-TCN w/o Wtrans
86.6 (5.4)
90.1 (6.2)
93.6 (4.1)
MA-TCN
86.8 (5.3)
91.4 (6.3)
94.3 (4.2)
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.

 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 31
Table III
Comparison with related work (original labels).
Accuracy
Edit
F1@10
Fusion-KV [14] (2020)
86.3 (-)
87.2 (-)
-
MRG-Net [15] (2020)
87.9 (4.2)
89.3 (5.2)
-
MA-TCN
85.8 (5.1)
90.3 (6.4)
93.6 (4.3)
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.

 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 32
Table IV
Ablation study on JIGSAWS dataset - Causal.
Accuracy
Edit
F1@10
V-TCN
81.5 (6.4)
73.0 (8.0)
82.0 (6.1)
K-TCN
76.7 (7.2)
74.4 (6.6)
81.5 (5.1)
C-TCN
82.3 (6.3)
82.1 (5.5)
88.0 (4.4)
E-TCN
82.6 (7.0)
81.4 (7.2)
87.3 (5.5)
MA-TCN
83.4 (5.8)
81.6 (7.6)
87.7 (5.3)
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.

 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
van Amsterdam et al.
Page 33
Table V
Results on real surgical data.
Accuracy
Edit
F1@10
V-TCN
72.6
79.7
81.9
K-TCN
77.0
77.8
82.1
E-TCN
78.1
80.3
82.9
C-TCN
79.3
78.2
81.7
MA-TCN
80.9
79.6
83.7
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 December 06.

