A Robust Vision-Based Dynamic Sign Language
Recognition Using a Hybrid CNN-LSTM Model
Adithya Rajapakshe
Dept.Electrical & Electronic Engineering
University of Sri Jayewardenepura
Nugegoda, Sri Lanka
hiruni.rajapaksha@gmail.com
Dinushika Chithrani
Dept.Electrical & Electronic Engineering
University of Sri Jayewardenepura
Nugegoda, Sri Lanka
dinushika219@gmail.com
Dhanuka Jayasinghe
Dept.Electrical & Electronic Engineering
University of Sri Jayewardenepura
Nugegoda, Sri Lanka
dsankalpa247@gmail.com
Umaya Bhashini Balagalla
Dept.Electrical & Electronic Engineering
University of Sri Jayewardenepura
Nugegoda, Sri Lanka
umayabalagalla@sjp.ac.lk
Bhathiya Pilanawithana
Dept.Electrical & Electronic Engineering
University of Sri Jayewardenepura
Nugegoda, Sri Lanka
bpilanawithana@sjp.ac.lk
Uditha Wijewardhana
Dept.Electrical & Electronic Engineering
University of Sri Jayewardenepura
Nugegoda, Sri Lanka
uditha@sjp.ac.lk
Udaya Wijenayake
Dept.Computer Engineering
University of Sri Jayewardenepura
Nugegoda, Sri Lanka
udayaw@sjp.ac.lk
Abstract—To recognize meaningful movements of hand ges-
tures, Sign language recognition is important. It is a signif-
icant solution in intelligent communication between the deaf
community and hearing societies. The general population’s lack
of proficiency in sign language impedes meaningful interactions
with individuals who depend on it. Although many studies have
been conducted on this topic, the development of static and
dynamic sign language recognition models continues to hold
significant challenges in the field of research. This paper presents
a novel framework for implementing a vision based Sinhala Sign
Language recognition model using deep learning approaches.
Our proposed methodology includes image acquisition, pre-
processing, detection, and classification stages for a complete
recognition. In the classification stage, the CNN-LSTM model
achieves 94% accuracy for around 20 signs. This method identi-
fies and interprets unique common signs and gives a meaningful
sentence in text. The proposed approach shows promising results
for interpreting both static and dynamic signs of Sinhala sign
language.
Index Terms—CNN, Deep Learning, Dynamic Sign Language
Recognition, LSTM, Sign Language
I. INTRODUCTION
Nearly 70 million people worldwide experience disabling
hearing loss, according to current statistics. A deaf person can
communicate thoughts using a specific hand gesture and facial
expressions rather than words. Sign language gestures are
accurately understood by only a limited group of people, such
as instructors and family members of individuals who are deaf.
Therefore, current translation services are either human-based
or expensive. Sign Language Recognition (SLR) is an effective
method that reduces the barrier between deaf communities and
hearing societies [1].
It tends to be a widely discussed topic with the increasing re-
search interests and interaction between humans and machines.
Using advanced technology, this problem can overcome the
communication difficulties they face.
Sign language uses multiple body parts, including fingers,
hands, arms, head, body, and facial expressions, to com-
municate information [2]. However, our proposed method-
ology only focuses on recognizing sign language through
hand gestures. Sign languages are complex linguistic systems,
not merely simple gestures. They break down into smaller
components like hand configuration, location, and movement.
These elements work together to form the language’s grammar
and vocabulary, much like how sounds and words function in
spoken languages [3]. There are two forms of hand gestures:
static and dynamic. Static gestures include performing only
hand poses, whereas dynamic gestures include the movements
of the hand to represent sign language words [4].
Consequently, recognizing dynamic signs poses challenges
due to their complexity and extensive variations in vocab-
ulary, potentially leading to misinterpretations of significant
differences among signers. Therefore, focusing on dynamic
SLR presents a more effective approach to addressing these
issues. However, dynamic SLR faces challenges in detecting
the hand location while moving and identifying the shape and
direction [5]. Recognition becomes more complex due to the
gestures performed by different people, which differ in spatial
and temporal variation. Furthermore, selecting an appropriate
classifier is critical for achieving accurate recognition results.
Therefore, we have used effective pre-processing, detection,
and classification methods to overcome the challenges.
Hand gesture recognition can be achieved through either a
979-8-3315-3098-3/25/$31.00 © 2025 IEEE
2025 5th International Conference on Advanced Research in Computing (ICARC) | 979-8-3315-3098-3/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICARC64760.2025.10963007
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:58:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

vision-based or sensor-based approach. Vision-based methods
capture images or video of hand gestures using a camera,
and sensor-based methods employ a sensor instrument (Glove)
to track and record the motion, position, and velocity of
the hand. As deep learning continued to evolve, researchers
directed their attention toward vision-based SLR methods,
employing cameras to capture data and streamline the process
for a more intuitive experience. The primary steps of a vision
based recognition system are frame acquisition, image pre-
processing, detection, and classification.
The sequel of the paper is organized as follows. Related
works are described in Section 2. Section 3 provides the
proposed methodology describing the major stages: dataset,
pre-processing & detection, and classification. The results
and discussion are included in Section 4. Finally, Section 5
summarizes the conclusion and future work.
II. RELATED WORKS
In this section, prior research approaches for sign language
translation are discussed.
The sign language gestures are input into the recognition
system as images. These images are either captured by frames
from videos or directly by devices such as web cameras [5],
[6], Kinect cameras [7], or CMOS image sensor cameras [8].
In [9], authors perform a binary mask through morphologi-
cal transforms to isolate the critical regions and the median
blue filtering method has been utilized for edge detection.
Similarly, [8] and [10] utilize morphological filtering. While
[8] uses the Otsu method for hand segmentation, [10] uses a
customized threshold method. Both [11] and [12], first perform
face detection and face elimination to ease the process of skin
segmentation.
Sign gestures are detected from the pre-processed images
in [6] and [13] using the MediaPipe (MP) approach for
real-time detection. It allows the detect both hand and body
movements. Both [9] and [12] propose hand detection and
tracking algorithms where the larger contours were extracted
eliminating further noise in the pre-processed image. In [10],
authors employ an algorithm where they input the segmented
image and output three features of the hand - height, width, and
centroid. Similarly, [8] utilizes an algorithm that extracts four
features - area of the hand, perimeter of the hand, detection of
the thumb, radial profile, and angular position. [5] employs a
B3D ResNet model to obtain feature vectors from the pre-
processed image sequence. [11] also uses a feature vector
of dimension 6, where key frames get extracted based on
hand position and the shape changes in the frame sequence.
[14] propose a 3D-ResNet module, which employs a sliding
window technique to input the selected images from the
sequence and output the features. In [15], authors employ
a Bayesian approach for skin classification. They used the
probabilities of observing skin and not observing skin. Without
estimating direct values for the two probabilities they use the
Bayes rule to define a threshold value. Hence adaptive skin
color detection has been achieved.
The sign language gestures are recognized in spoken lan-
guage in [9] by utilizing a CNN model (for static signs) and
a tree architecture (for the dynamic signs, that are formed
by static signs). The images containing the static signs are
input to the model and depending on three consecutive recog-
nized signs, 2/3 majority sign is considered the final output.
When the classified static signs were ordered in a pre-defined
sequence a dynamic sign is recognized. [5] addresses the
difficulty of recognizing similar hand gestures apart, with the
help of a complex model architecture including convolutional
layers, LSTM layers, and a soft-max layer. The proposed
method inputs the extracted feature vectors from the video
frames and labels each after analysing. Hence the video
sequence label will be predicted and then output the prediction
with the top score. [6] has used an LSTM Neural Network
alone to classify static and dynamic signs. The extracted
points from MP Holistic are fed into the model and output
the recognized static signs. Aside from the neural network
architectures, [7] proposes an algorithm with two steps, step
1 being a Dynamic Time Warping algorithm (DTW) and step
2 being a Nearest Neighbor classification. A dictionary has
been implemented with 75 sequences from 15 gestures. DTW
calculates each of the two arrays performed by input frames
for each sample in the dictionary and outputs the cost function
values. Depending on these values, recognition is provided as
a word-by-word output from the classifier. In a similar study,
[14] employs a model with a soft-DTW constraint along with
LSTM and Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC). [12],
utilizes a CNN and LSTM model combination. In this model,
the CNN which is composed of max-pooling layers and fully
connected layers transforms the pre-processed images into vec-
tor representations and inputs them into the LSTM network.
Each state of LSTM predicts the label of the sign and helps
to recognize the word in the next movement with an accuracy
of 98.43%. In [11], the authors propose an SVM architecture
with three classification models for Zernike moments-based,
trajectory-based, and shape-based recognition.
III. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
The system mainly consists of the following stages shown
in Fig. 1. The proposed system is developed using deep
neural network models, building on their proven success in
recent gesture recognition research. Specifically, it consists of
a hybrid model of CNN and LSTM architecture to extract
features and recognize them.
A. Dataset
We created a new dataset with over 2500 sample videos
of 22 Sinhala Sign Language (SSL) gestures from 24 people.
The respective SSL signs were initially taught by teachers at
‘The School for the Deaf, Ratmalana, Sri Lanka’. A USB 2.0
HD UVC WebCam and a Python script leveraging OpenCV
were used to collect and store 3-second long videos. We se-
lected words related to interactions between hearing-impaired
people and medical centers, grocery stores, and banks. Table 1
illustrates the data set including both static and dynamic signs.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:58:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Fig. 1. Overall methodology
TABLE I
COLLECTED GESTURE SIGNS
Sinhalese Word
English Idea
Type
Awe
Came
Dynamic
Epa
Don’t
Dynamic
Hadagannai
Remake / Update
Dynamic
Haduna
Felt sick / Had an illness
Dynamic
Hi
Hi
Dynamic
Ithuru
Change (with related to money)
Dynamic
Kauntaraya
Counter (in a bank or medical
station)
Dynamic
Kalanthe
Dizziness
Dynamic
Keeyada?/Mudal
How much? / Money
Dynamic
Ko?
Where?
Dynamic
Kohomada?
How are you?
Dynamic
Mata
(to) Me
Static
Nawatha
Again
Dynamic
Oba
You
Static
Pereda
Day before yesterday
Dynamic
Potha
Book
Dynamic
Ridenenawa
Feeling sick / Hurt
Dynamic
Sbha Udasanak
Good Morning
Dynamic
Sthuthiyi
Thank you
Dynamic
Thampath Karana
Store
Dynamic
Thibuna
Had
Static
Ugura
Throat
Dynamic
B. Pre-processing and Detection
This stage is used to improve the overall efficiency and
isolate the hand gestures from the background or non-relevant
elements of a frame. First to ensure that the face does not
interfere with hand gesturing, detecting and masking the face
is done using the Haar Cascade Classifier, in the gray scale.
After applying masking to the original image, the face is
removed from the frame. Then the face-masked image is
converted to YCbCr color space, which is effective for skin
color segmentation. To highlight the skin regions from the rest
of the background, a binary mask is created corresponding to
common skin color tones (20,135,77 & 255,170,138). Then the
image is converted to gray scale and noise is reduced using
a bilateral filter. Canny edge detection is utilized to highlight
the edges within the masked image. To accurately extract the
hand contour, contours are subsequently extracted from the
detected edges, and the largest contour by area is selected
(corresponds to the hand). This contour is used to create a
convex hull and a mask is generated accordingly to isolate the
hand. Further processing is done to identify the bounding box
and the hand is cropped from the rest of the image to feed
into the classification model.
C. Classification
Unlike a static sign, a dynamic sign is a combination of
static signs distributed over a specific period of time. Because
of that, not only the spatial features, but also the temporal
features representing the relationship between each individual
frame is required to be extracted. For this, our proposed model
leverages a deep learning based hybrid architecture consists
with a CNN and an LSTM as shown in Fig.2.
A CNN is a multi-layer neural network specifically de-
signed for processing two-dimensional data. By employing
concepts such as sparse connectivity and shared weights,
CNNs significantly reduce the number of training parameters,
enhancing their adaptability to identify patterns in recognizing
images. As the first stage of the proposed model, a CNN-
based approach is incorporated. Here, the CNN architecture is
specifically designed and tuned to leverage the full potential of
the hand extracting algorithm which is a novel combination of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:58:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Fig. 2. CNN-LSTM model layer architecture (Considering 1 time step)
already available techniques for the spatial feature extraction
of each frame. Basically, a CNN consists of convolutional
layers, batch normalization layers and max-pooling layers. The
Convolutional layers convolve the input image with its kernels
to produce feature maps that capture various patterns. Batch
normalization is mainly applied to accelerate the training by
normalizing the inputs of each layer where max-pooling layers
used to reduce the dimensionality of the input data reducing
the computational overhead. The proposed CNN model uses
3 convolutional layers with each having 64 3x3 kernels with
a 2x2 max pooling layer for improved feature extraction. This
enables the complex feature extraction from less number of
pixels with improved computational efficiency. Further, ReLU
activation function is used to introduce non-linearity, enabling
the network to learn complex and abstract features more
effectively.
After extracting the features from a 56x56 pre-processed
and hand detected input video frame, the feature maps are
flattened into a one-dimensional vector of size 1600, preparing
the data for final classification. The flattened vector is then
passed to the LSTM model for the next stage of feature
extraction, the temporal feature extraction. LSTM is a variation
of an RNN model which has the capability of handling long
time-series data without getting affected by the issue of van-
ishing gradient. The proposed LSTM model comprises with
two layers: the first layer identifies the short-term temporal
patterns and fed to the second layer for recognizing long-
term temporal dependencies. By combining the outputs of
these two layers, our methodology effectively discerns signs
with complex gestures, enhancing classification accuracy and
robustness. To avoid network overfitting, a dropout layer is
employed with a dropout rate of 0.25 between the two LSTM
layers. Finally, the features are fed into a Dense layer for
classification. Model is trained using the Adam optimizer with
a batch size of 5 and 0.2 validation split.
As the final step, an algorithm based on the prediction
probabilities is used to generate the classification results.
During the predictions, each continuous frame is assigned a
predicted class probability, taking into account both spatial
and temporal characteristics. However, this method has some
issues. Directly using these predicted probability values can
lead to inaccurate predictions or result in an output class even
when no gesture is present in the real-time feed. To resolve
this, a threshold based approach is implemented to check
whether a fixed number of consecutive frames predict the same
class with a higher probability than the threshold. The number
of frames and the prediction probability threshold values were
determined by analyzing the model’s prediction patterns. As
a result, this method ensures accurate and continuous sign
predictions in a real-time video feed consisting of multiple
signs.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we present and analyze the performance
and compare our CNN and LSTM model, with a Transformer
architecture and an RNN model. As well as we discuss the
novelty of the SSL gesture dataset and the user friendly
interface our system uses.
Fig. 3. Training loss graph of CNN-LSTM architecture
As shown in Fig. 3, the validation loss stabilizes around 0.4
after an initial decrease, indicating a reasonable fit with some
overfitting towards the later epochs. In the accuracy graph Fig.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:58:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Fig. 4. Training accuracy graph of CNN-LSTM architecture
4, training accuracy reaches 1.0 demonstrating the model’s
strong learning capacity. Validation accuracy reaches about 0.9
suggesting a good generalization despite the slight overfitting
indicated in the loss graph. The overall model achieved a test
accuracy of 93.72% with a loss of 0.2921. Achieved accuracies
for a set of sign gestures are shown in Fig. 6. Two benchmark
models were developed and fine-tuned as hybrid architectures,
one being CNN and Transformer and another one as CNN and
RNN models. Accuracies are 85.09% and 86.91%, respectively
as illustrated in Fig. 7 and Table 2. While the CNN model
analyses the sequential data, the Transformer and RNN models
analyze the temporal data in the extracted features.
The ability of LSTM to retain information with memory
cells for longer periods allowing to capture long-term depen-
dencies of complex dynamic signs outperforms the traditional
RNN which struggles with issues like vanishing gradients.
When considering the transformer, LSTM has performed
well due to its stability in training for sequential data with
a comparatively smaller dataset. With transformers, having
a larger amount of data is important to achieve the best
performance which may not always be available with sign
language datasets. In terms of accuracy, scalability and higher
generalization CNN-LSTM model architecture shows a robust
performance.
The proposed CNN-LSTM architecture leverages the full
potential of the proposed hand detection algorithm enabling
the learning and classification of complex hand gestures. The
model performs well with complex and lengthy dynamic signs
with the used CNN architecture for spatial feature extraction
and 2 layered LSTM architecture for temporal feature extrac-
tion. Also, the model performs well in identifying 2 signs
separately which are almost similar statically but different
dynamically.
The paper presents a new dataset including 22 SSL gestures
that could be used in day to day scenarios. There are some
studies carried out with invented datasets for SSL but most
of them are static signs [7], [9]. But our dataset (over 2500
sample videos) mostly contains dynamic signs which are more
practical gestures used in SSL. In [11], authors implement an
Indian Sign Language dataset including alphabet (static signs)
and dynamic signs (videos) from 7 people. While collecting
the images and videos, wearing at least half sleeves is a
must. However implementing our dataset does not require any
special clothing. Using 24 SSL users enriched the dataset with
diverse and comprehensive data.
Fig. 5. User interface
Our system was developed as a full-duplex communication
system to facilitate meaningful conversations through audio di-
alogs in real time. The system translates sign language into text
and audio for the normal hearing people and converts spoken
audio into readable text, enabling hearing-aided individuals
to follow the conversation seamlessly. As the end result, we
designed a user-friendly application with an intuitive interface.
This user interface works as the front-end for the backend
process of capturing video frames, processes them in real-time,
displays the translated output, and generates audio responses,
enabling seamless and effective two-way communication.
Fig. 6. Accuracies for each sign gesture
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:58:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Fig. 7. Testing accuracy and testing loss comparison
TABLE II
COMPARISON OF CNN-LSTM, CNN-TRANSFORMER, AND CNN-RNN
MODEL PERFORMANCE
Metric
CNN-LSTM
Our Model
CNN-
Transformer
CNN-RNN
Training Accuracy
99.89%
96.34%
99.59%
Training Loss
0.2921
0.1423
0.0161
Test Accuracy
93.72%
85.09%
86.91%
Test Loss
0.2921
0.7294
0.6592
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presents a novel framework for recognizing
continuous SSL using a hybrid CNN-LSTM architecture. Our
model effectively handles both static and dynamic signs with
a test accuracy of 93.72% with a loss of 0.2921 outperforming
the baseline models. This research contributes to the field of
SSL recognition with the data set (more than 2500 sample
videos) for future researchers and offers better communication
between the deaf community and hearing individuals. Since
we use constant threshold values for skin color segmentation,
the hand may not be accurately detected in poor lighting
conditions. Adaptive thresholds and the lighting compensation
using CLA Histogram Equalizer can be used to overcome this
issue. Further morphological operations can be used to refine
hand boundaries.
To ensure practical applicability, we tested our system with
the hearing aid users and achieved promising results for the
selected set of signs. This demonstrates the effectiveness of
the system while also highlighting areas for improvement. We
believe the accuracy can be further enhanced by expanding the
dataset to include a broader range of gestures and optimizing
the model for real-world situations. Future work will focus
on these improvements to make the system more robust and
versatile for practical use in diverse communication scenarios.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the Science and Technology
Human Resource Development Project, Ministry of Education,
Sri Lanka, funded by the Asian Development Bank (Grant No.
STHRD/CRG/R1/SJ/06).
REFERENCES
[1] I. A. Adeyanju, O. O. Bello, and M. A. Adegboye, “Machine learning
methods for sign language recognition: A critical review and analysis,”
Intelligent Systems with Applications, vol. 12, p. 200056, 2021.
[2] B. K. Triwijoyo, L. Y. R. Karnaen, and A. Adil, “Deep learning approach
for sign language recognition,” JITEKI: Jurnal Ilmiah Teknik Elektro
Komputer dan Informatika, vol. 9, no. 1, 2023.
[3] D. S. Ruiz, J. A. Olvera-L´opez, and I. Olmos-Pineda, “Word level sign
language recognition via handcrafted features,” IEEE Latin America
Transactions, vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 839–848, 2023.
[4] R. Rastgoo, K. Kiani, and S. Escalera, “Sign language recognition: A
deep survey,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 164, p. 113794,
2021.
[5] Y. Liao, P. Xiong, W. Min, W. Min, and J. Lu, “Dynamic sign language
recognition based on video sequence with blstm-3d residual networks,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 38 044–38 054, 2019.
[6] R. RKDMP, W. Wijekoon, K. Rajapakse, K. Rasanjalee, and D. De Silva,
“Real-time sign language translator,” International Journal of Engineer-
ing and Management Research, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 117–124, 2022.
[7] P. Fernando and P. Wimalaratne, “Sign language translation approach
to sinhalese language,” GSTF Journal on Computing (JoC), vol. 5, pp.
1–9, 2016.
[8] A. Gupta, V. K. Sehrawat, and M. Khosla, “Fpga based real time human
hand gesture recognition system,” Procedia Technology, vol. 6, pp. 98–
107, 2012.
[9] I. Dhanawansa and R. Rajakaruna, “Sinhala sign language interpreter
optimized for real–time implementation on a mobile device,” in 2021
10th International Conference on Information and Automation for
Sustainability (ICIAfS).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 422–427.
[10] K. C. Neo and H. Ibrahim, “Development of sign signal translation
system based on altera’s fpga de2 board,” International Journal of
Human Computer Interaction (IJHCI), vol. 2, no. 3, p. 101, 2011.
[11] P. Athira, C. Sruthi, and A. Lijiya, “A signer independent sign language
recognition with co-articulation elimination from live videos: an indian
scenario,” Journal of King Saud University-Computer and Information
Sciences, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 771–781, 2022.
[12] S. Yang and Q. Zhu, “Continuous chinese sign language recognition with
cnn-lstm,” in Ninth international conference on digital image processing
(ICDIP 2017), vol. 10420.
SPIE, 2017, pp. 83–89.
[13] A. M. Buttar, U. Ahmad, A. H. Gumaei, A. Assiri, M. A. Akbar, and
B. F. Alkhamees, “Deep learning in sign language recognition: A hybrid
approach for the recognition of static and dynamic signs,” Mathematics,
vol. 11, no. 17, p. 3729, 2023.
[14] J. Pu, W. Zhou, and H. Li, “Iterative alignment network for continuous
sign language recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 4165–4174.
[15] A. Rasim and T. Alexander, “Hand detection based on skin color
segmentation and classification of image local features,” Tem Journal,
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 150–155, 2013.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:58:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

