applied  
sciences
Article
Gesture Recognition Based on 3D Human Pose
Estimation and Body Part Segmentation for RGB
Data Input
Ngoc-Hoang Nguyen, Tran-Dac-Thinh Phan, Guee-Sang Lee *, Soo-Hyung Kim
and Hyung-Jeong Yang
Department of Electronics and Computer Engineering, Chonnam National University, 77 Yongbong-ro,
Gwangju 500-757, Korea; hoangnguyenkcv@gmail.com (N.-H.N.);
phantrandacthinh2382@gmail.com (T.-D.-T.P.); shkim@jnu.ac.kr (S.-H.K.); hjyang@jnu.ac.kr (H.-J.Y.)
* Correspondence: gslee@jnu.ac.kr
Received: 31 July 2020; Accepted: 4 September 2020; Published: 6 September 2020


Abstract: This paper presents a novel approach for dynamic gesture recognition using multi-features
extracted from RGB data input. Most of the challenges in gesture recognition revolve around the axis
of the presence of multiple actors in the scene, occlusions, and viewpoint variations. In this paper,
we develop a gesture recognition approach by hybrid deep learning where RGB frames, 3D skeleton
joint information, and body part segmentation are used to overcome such problems. Extracted
from the RGB images are the multimodal input observations, which are combined by multi-modal
stream networks suited to diﬀerent input modalities: residual 3D convolutional neural networks
based on ResNet architecture (3DCNN_ResNet) for RGB images and color body part segmentation
modalities; long short-term memory network (LSTM) for 3D skeleton joint modality. We evaluated
the proposed model on four public datasets: UTD multimodal human action dataset, gaming 3D
dataset, NTU RGB+D dataset, and MSRDailyActivity3D dataset and the experimental results on
these datasets proves the eﬀectiveness of our approach.
Keywords: dynamic gesture recognition; human action recognition; multi-modalities network
1. Introduction
Gesture recognition has recently attracted much attention because of its wide applications such
as the human–computer interaction, telecommunications, and robotics, but it still remains as one of
the major challenges because of the inherent complexity of human motions. In early times, gesture
recognition based on conventional techniques of classiﬁcation with handcrafted features, such as
support vector machine (SVM), bag-of-features and multiclass SVM, and hidden Markov model
(HMM), have been proposed [1–3]. Recently, deep learning-based methods are increasingly employed
due to their advantages of end-to-end learning by automatic extraction of spatiotemporal features from
raw data. The development of deep learning methods based on a convolution neural network (CNN)
and recurrent neural network (RNN) or long short-term memory network (LSTM) have achieved
positive results in handling gesture recognition tasks [4–8]. However, there are limitations in the
performance of gesture classiﬁcation due to the complexity of the scene, e.g., the presence of multiple
actors in the background, occlusions, illumination changes, or viewpoint variations.
In existing methods, to overcome the challenges caused by the issue of background or viewpoint
variations, gesture recognition is usually developed by combining multiple modalities of data inputs
(such as skeleton joints information, human body shape, RGB, optical ﬂow, and depth frames) with
newly developed deep learning models [9–11]. By utilizing skeleton joints information or depth
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 6188; doi:10.3390/app10186188
www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 6188
2 of 13
information, gesture recognition performance has been signiﬁcantly improved because they are helpful
in the representation of gestures and played an important role in gesture identiﬁcation. Although
human skeleton joints and depth data can be collected directly from time-of-ﬂight (ToF) cameras,
gesture recognition on RGB video input is a substantial challenge because the human pose should
be estimated with high accuracy. Skeleton joints convey vital information to represent gesture from
the human pose, but it is not enough to identify complicated motions when it does not match to the
shape of body parts correctly. For instance, if there are other actors present in the scene together with
the main target, the action of other objects from the background can cause confusion to the correct
extraction of the target person’s skeleton. Figure 1b shows possible errors in skeleton joints extraction
of the main person due to the presence of other moving objects. However, when the body parts are
segmented beforehand, the skeleton of a target can be obtained with much higher accuracy because the
layout of the skeleton is restricted by the body part. Moreover, skeleton joints of the frame sequence
of a video can be temporally incoherent due to independent errors in each frame as we illustrate in
Figure 2; and this can cause incorrect classiﬁcation.
Figure 1. Illustration of the case in which many actors are present in the scene. The ﬁrst row (a) RGB
input images, the second row (b) extracted skeleton joints images, and the last row (c) color-encoded
body part segmentation images. In this case, the skeleton joints extraction can be distracted by other
objects in the background, but the color-encoded body part segmentation can help avoiding such a case.
 
Figure 2. Illustration of skeleton joints of sequence sequential frames can be incoherent due to
independent error in each frame.
In this paper, we propose a multi-modal gesture recognition method for RGB data input with a
multi-modal algorithm. The algorithm consists of three submodels: two residual 3D convolutional
neural networks based on ResNet architecture (3DCNN_ResNet) [12] and a long short-term memory

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 6188
3 of 13
network (LSTM) to perform on three data modalities: RGB images, color body part segmentations,
and 3D human skeleton joints, respectively. We extract color body part segmentations and 3D human
skeleton joints from RGB input.
The color body part segmentations with 12 semantic parts are obtained by the segmentation
CNN network ReﬁneNet [13]. By utilizing body part segmentation, the gesture recognition network
can focus on only the target person in the presence of multiple objects in the scene. The 3D human
skeleton joints information of the target person is extracted by the 3D human pose estimation network
called Pose3D [14]. Pose3D is a deep learning network that obtains the sequence of 3D poses based
on the temporal information across the sequence of 2D joint locations in order to prevent temporally
incoherent estimation. The gesture classes are predicted by a combination of these three submodels
that are eﬀectively fused by an integrated stacking module as the late fusion layers.
The contributions of the paper are:
•
The reason for the distraction of skeleton joints extraction has been addressed, which hinders
from the proper functioning of gesture recognition methods. In other words, the existence of noise
or extra persons in the background can cause such distractions.
•
The solution to the problem of multiple actors in the scene, which caused the distraction of
skeleton joints extraction, has been presented with target person extraction. The target person is
segmented, and used for eliminating distraction in skeleton joints extraction.
This idea of using target person extraction has never been addressed before in the literature as far
as we know.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: related works are given in Section 2.
In Section 3, the proposed algorithm for gesture recognition is presented. The experiments on four
public datasets to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of our approach are given in Section 4. Finally, a conclusion
is given in Section 5.
2. Related Works
In this section, we brieﬂy described the previous methods relevant to our work for gesture
recognition. Although signiﬁcant improvement on gesture recognition has been reported, but new
challenges appear with diﬀerent input modalities and restrictions.
In early years, gesture or action recognition problem has been dealt with classical machine
learning methods such as support vector machine (SVM) [1], bag-of-features [2], and hidden Markov
model (HMM) [3]. In these methods, gestures are classiﬁed based on the features extracted by
a hand-engineered extractor. Hussein et al. [1] presented a discriminative descriptor for action
classiﬁcation based on the covariance matrix for 3D skeleton joint locations. Dardas [2] similarly used
the SVM classiﬁer to identify gesture classes, but via a bag-of-words vector mapped from key points
extracted by scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT). Lee [3] presented a method using HMM based on
the likelihood threshold estimation of the input pattern. The gesture recognition task has been tackled
by conventional machine learning methods, but there are signiﬁcant limitations in these approaches.
For instance, the parameters of the model depend on experience, and the system is sensitive to noise.
Recently, due to the revolution of deep learning, gesture recognition approaches have been
presented with impressive performances compared to the traditional methods. The deep learning-based
methods became popular due to its capability to extract spatiotemporal features from the raw video
input automatically. A convolutional neural network (CNN) was initially used for extracting spatial
features for static images, but it has been extended to deal with diﬀerent input types or to extract
diﬀerent types of features. Various approaches [4,5,15,16] have utilized CNN to treat sequential frames
of a video as multi-channel inputs for the purpose of video classiﬁcation. Feichtenhofer [4] incorporated
a two-stream network with separate ConvNets for RGB images and optical ﬂow images to extract
motion information for gesture classiﬁcation. Kopuklu [15] proposed data level fusion to combine RGB
and optical ﬂow modalities with static images to extract action features. CNN can be incorporated

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 6188
4 of 13
with RNN or LSTM to learn both spatial and temporal features of a video for action classiﬁcation.
Donahue [8] deployed long-term recurrent convolutional network (LRCN), in which CNN is used
to extract spatial features of images and LSTM is applied to capture temporal dependencies in the
sequence of such features.
For dynamic gesture recognition, [7,17,18] applied a 3D convolutional neural network to capture
discriminative features along both spatial and temporal dimensions due to 3D convolutions and
3D pooling. Tran [17] used spatiotemporal features extracted by 3DCNN to classify gesture with
SVM classiﬁer. Molchanov [16] proposed recurrent 3D convolutional neural networks (R3DCNN) to
recognize gestures online, where 3DCNN is used as a feature extractor. The gesture recognition based
on a human pose has also achieved impressive results. Utilizing RNN or LSTM to capture temporal
features from human skeleton joints for gesture classiﬁcation is gaining popularity [19–21], in which
skeleton joints are extracted by depth information with a ToF camera, but it becomes more challenging
when only RGB data input is used. In other works, multiple data modalities or multiple deep learning
models are combined to achieve better performance in gesture classiﬁcation. Duan [9] presented a
convolutional two-stream consensus voting network based on 3DCNN for RGB and depth channels to
identify the gesture classes in a video input. Chai [10] also proposed a multi-stream model based on
RNN with hand location information extracted from RGB-D input. The summary of the related works
is given in Table 1.
Table 1. The summary of related works.
Author
Approach/Features
Details
Comments
Hussen et al. [1]
Support Vector Machine
(SVM)
Discriminative classiﬁcation
from 3D skeleton joints
Classical machine
learning methods.
Dardas et al. [2]
Bag of features
Classiﬁcation via
bag-of-words vector
Lee et al. [3]
Hidden Markov Model
HMM based on the likelihood
threshold estimation
Feichtenhofer et al. [4]
Two-stream network
with separate ConvNets
Extract motion from RGB
images and optical ﬂow
images
Early deep
learning-based
methods
Kopuklu et al. [15]
Data level fusion
Combine RGB and optical ﬂow
modalities with static images
Donahue et al. [8]
Long-term recurrent
convolutional network
CNN and LSTM for
spatio-temporal features
Tran et al. [17]
3DCNN, SVM classiﬁer
Spatio-temporal features
extracted by 3DCNN
3DCNN to capture
spatial and
temporal features
Molchanov et al. [16]
Recurrent 3D
Convolutional Neural
Networks
Online gesture recognition by
3DCNN
Yan et al. [19],
Li et al. [20], and
Omran et al. [21]
RNN or LSTM, human
skeleton joints
Capture temporal features
from skeleton joints and depth
Deep learning +
human pose
Duan et al. [9]
Convolutional
two-stream consensus
voting network
Combine the results from RGB
and depth in a video input
Multi-modal or
multiple deep
learning models
Chai et al. [10]
Multi-stream model
based on RNN
Extract hand location
information from RGB-D input
Most of the gesture recognition methods exploit the human pose estimation, however often
the pose estimation in the video can often be inconsistent because of independent errors in the
sequence of frames. Additionally, the extraction of skeleton joints may not be successful when the

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 6188
5 of 13
background contains multiple objects or human beings. In this paper, we try to solve these problems
through the use of segmentation of the target person. We propose a novel method for gesture
recognition with multi-modalities: RGB images, color body part segmentation images, and 3D skeleton
joints information.
3. Proposed Method
In this section, we present in detail our proposed approach for gesture recognition. The proposed
method consisted of three submodels: two 3D_ ResNet networks and an LSTM network to deal with
RGB frames, color body part segmentation images, and 3D skeleton joints information. These three
submodels were eﬀectively fused by integrated stacking module as a late fusion layer in order to
decide the gesture class. We show an overview of the proposed algorithm in Figure 3.
 
Figure 3. The proposed approach. This algorithm consists of three subnetworks and the fusion module.
In our algorithm, given the RGB image sequence of a video, the color body part segmentation
images were generated by the segmentation network—ReﬁneNet [22]. Some of the datasets, e.g.,
MSRDailyActivity3D, contained sometimes more than one person on the scene. The target person was
a person whose position was nearest to the center of the screen and closest to the camera in most of the
frames of the video. Therefore, a person closer to the center area was selected ﬁrst. If more than one
person were around the center of the screen, the person closer to the camera was selected from the
depth information. From the color body part segmentation, the background of the input image was
excluded from the scene, leaving only the target person, which was used for extracting 3D human
skeleton joints by temporal 3D human pose estimation network—Pose3D. Two-stream 3D_ResNet
networks were used to learn the features from the RGB images and color body part segmentation
images for gesture classiﬁcation. In the other subnetwork, the extracted 3D human skeleton joints
were utilized by the LSTM network.
•
Color body part segmentation: The ReﬁneNet model, given the RGB input frames, produced
the color-coded 12 body parts segmentation. The ReﬁneNet is a multi-path reﬁnement network
for semantic segmentation via multi-level features and potentially long-range connections.
The ReﬁneNet model typically consists of four blocks: adaptive convolution, multi-resolution
fusion, chained residual pooling, and output convolution. The batch-normalization layers were
simpliﬁed from the convolution block but it still contained the remaining convolution units of
the original ResNet. Multi-resolution fusion performed feature map fusion by convolutions and
a summation. Multiple resolution feature maps extracted from varied input paths were fused
into a high-resolution feature map. Additionally, the output feature map was fused through

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 6188
6 of 13
multiple pooling blocks of chained residual pooling blocks. The ﬁnal prediction was given
by the output convolution block, which had another remaining convolution unit and soft-max
layer. The ReﬁneNet network was based on ResNeXt-101 [23] with trained weights by the UP-3D
dataset [24] for color-coded 12 body parts segmentation. Figure 4 shows the example of color
body parts segmentation on sampled frames on a video.
Figure 4. Example of color-encoded 12 body parts segmentation from RGB images sequence by the
ReﬁneNet model.
•
Temporal video 3D human pose estimation: We extracted 3D joints skeleton information for
gesture recognition from temporal video 3D human pose estimation called Pose_3D [14] from
background subtracted RGB images. The Pose_3D network is a sequence-to-sequence network that
predicts a sequence of temporally consistent 3D human pose from the sequence of 2D human poses.
The 2D human pose was obtained by the state-of-art 2D human pose estimation framework—the
stacked-hourglass network [25] trained on the Human3.6M dataset [26]. The decoder of the
Pose_3D consists of LSTM units and residual connection to predict temporally consistent 3D poses
of the current frame using the 3D poses of previous frames and 2D joints information of all frames,
which were taken from the ﬁnal state of the encoder. The temporal smoothness constraint was
imposed on the 3D pose extraction of a video. Since the stacked-hourglass network was used
for 2D pose estimation on individual frames, this constraint made the predicted 3D poses more
stable and reliable even with 2D pose estimation failure in a few frames within the temporal
window. Figure 5 shows the example of temporal 3D skeleton joints of video frames extracted by
the Pose_3D network.

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 6188
7 of 13
Figure 5. Example of skeleton joints extraction from RGB images sequence by temporal video 3D
human pose estimation-Pose_3D.
•
Two-stream 3D_ResNet networks for RGB and color body part segmentation modalities:
The residual 3D_CNN network based on ResNet architecture [23] was applied to beneﬁt from
two data modalities: the background subtracted RGB images and color-coded 12 body parts
segmentation images for gesture classiﬁcation. For the input of 3D_CNN of the RGB image
branch, we subtracted the background of the RGB image by color body part segmentation
and fed it into the network. Due to spatiotemporal feature learning by 3D convolution and
3D pooling, the 3D_CNN network is known as one of the essential frameworks for video
classiﬁcation. Residual 3D_CNN could signiﬁcantly improve the classiﬁcation performance of
basic 3D_CNN framework. The 3D_ResNet is one of the current residual 3D_CNN versions.
Various ResNet-based architectures with 3D convolutions were studied, but the 3D_ResNet
network based on ResNeXt-101 was employed because of the quality performance for the
proposed method.
Diﬀerent from other original bottleneck blocks with a standard convolutional layer, the ResNeXt
block employs a group convolution layer with its capacity to divide the feature maps into small groups.
The single 3D_ResNet stream modality network in our proposed method included ﬁve ResNeXt
blocks. The structure of each ResNeXt block consisted of convolution layers (group convolution
layer), a batch normalization (BatchNorm) layer, and a rectiﬁed-linear unit (ReLu) layer, as shown
in Figure 6. The input of each modality stream network was a ﬁxed number of T sampled frames
of a video: Vc = {xc1, xc2, . . . , xcT} for RGB modality and Vps = {xps1, xps2, . . . , xpsT} for color body
part segmentation modality. The operation function of these stream-networks was Θc(.) and Θps(.)
respectively. Then, the prediction probabilities of the stream networks for RGB input and color body
part segmentation for i classes can be described as:
Pc{p1|Vc, p2|Vc, . . . , pi|Vc} = Θc(Vc)
(1)
Pps{p1|Vps, p2|Vps, . . . , pi|Vps} = Θps(Vps)
(2)
where pi is the prediction probability of the video belonging to the class ith, and Pc and Pps denote the
network outputs, which are the vectors or class prediction probabilities.

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 6188
8 of 13
•
The LSTM network for 3D skeleton joints modality: The LSTM network was proposed as a
submodel for gesture recognition to beneﬁt from the extracted 3D skeleton joints data. The 3D
skeleton data provides useful information about the temporal features such as the localization of
the relevant body joints over a time series to recognize the performed action. The LSTM networks
are utilized to capture the contextual information of a temporal sequence for long periods by the
gates and memory cells. In an LSTM network, the operation of gates and memory cells by time
can be described as follows:

it = σ(Wi[xt, ht−1] + bi),
ft = σ

W f [xt, ht−1] + bf

,
ot = σ(Wo[xt, ht−1] + bo),
ect = tan h(Wc[xt, ht−1] + bc),
ct = ft ∗ct−1 + it ∗ect,
ht = tan h(ct) ∗ot
(3)
where i, f, and o are the vectors of the input gate, the forget gate and the output gate, respectively.ect
and ct denote the “candidate” hidden state and internal memory of the unit respectively. ht is the
output hidden state and σ(.) is a sigmoid function while W and b represent connected weights
matrix and bias vectors, respectively.
Figure 6. The overview of ResNet blocks. It consists of two convolution layers (1 × 1 × 1 kernel size),
one group convolution layer (3 × 3 × 3 kernel size), and three batch normalization (BatchNorm) layers
and rectiﬁed-linear unit (ReLu) layers.
In our approach, we used the relevant 17 human skeleton joints extracted by the Pose_3D network
to perform the gesture classiﬁcation. The input of the LSTM submodel was T × 51 vector, which contains
3D location of 17 skeleton joints in a sequence of T frames of a video. This input vector is deﬁned as Vs
= {vs1, vs2, . . . , vsT}, where vsk is a 51 × 1 vector of 3D position information of all skeleton joints at the
kth frame. The prediction probability of the LSTM modality network for i gesture classes by a given
input Vj is:
Pj{p1|Vj, p2|Vj, . . . , pi|Vj} = Θj(Vj)
(4)
where Θj(.) represents the operation function of the LSTM network.
•
Multi-modality fusion by an integrated stacking module: The ﬁnal gesture class was predicted by
the fusion score of three submodels. The multi-modalities fusion block combined the prediction
score of submodels in the integrated stacking module, as shown in Figure 3. This module is a
more extensive multi-headed neural network, which consists of a concatenation layer, two fully
connected layers and a dropout layer to avoid overﬁtting. We used the outputs of each subnetworks
as separate input-heads to the module. The fusion score computed by the fusion block with
non-linear operation function Θfusion(.) to predict gesture classes as follows:

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 6188
9 of 13
P
n
p1
Vc, p2
Vc, . . . , pi
Vc
o
=
Θ fusion

Pc
n
p1
Vc, p2
Vc, . . . , pi
Vc
o
, Pps
n
p1
Vps, p2
Vps, . . . , pi
Vps
o
,
Pj
n
p1
Vj, p2
Vj, . . . , pi
Vj
o

(5)
4. Experimental Results
To evaluate the performance of the proposed method, we did experiments on four public datasets:
UTD multimodal human action dataset [27], gaming 3D dataset [28], NTU RGB+D dataset [29] and
MSRDailyActivity3D dataset [30]. In these datasets, we used only RGB modality for our work.
4.1. Datasets
•
UTD Multimodal Human Action dataset [27]: is a multimodal human action dataset that was
collected by using a Microsoft Kinect sensor and a wearable inertial sensor. This data includes 27
diﬀerent types of actions performed by eight gestures, where each actor repeats each gesture four
times. This dataset contains a total of 861 gesture videos after removing corrupted sequences.
•
Gaming 3D dataset [28]: is a collection of 600 videos for action recognition in the gaming scenario.
This dataset consisted of 20 action classes performed by ten subjects, and each subject repeated
each action three times. Besides providing the action class label for each video, this dataset also
had the ground truth for the peak frame of each action.
•
NTU RGB+D dataset [29]: is a large dataset that contains 56,880 RGB-D videos captured by three
Kinect V2 sensors concurrently. This dataset consisted of 60 human activities related to daily
actions, mutual actions, and medical conditions. In our work, we only focused on the daily actions
category with the RGB video data.
•
MSRDailyActivity3D dataset [30]: is a dataset captured for daily human activities in a living
room. This collection contained 16 regular activity classes performed by ten diﬀerent individuals.
There are 320 activity videos. This dataset was made with a noisy background with other activities
from untargeted people.
For the MSRDailyActivity3D dataset and Gaming 3D dataset, we stratiﬁed a random split of
each dataset into 5 folds with a train/valid/test set by ratio 8:1:1, respectively. For the UTD-MHAD
dataset, we applied the 8-fold cross-validation method. Seven sets were used for training and the
remaining set was used for testing. For the NTU-RGB+D dataset, there are two kinds of benchmarks
recommended by the creator of the NTU-RGB+D dataset, which are cross-subject and cross-view
benchmarks. We chose the cross-view benchmark, which included 37,462 clips for training and 18,817
clips for testing without validation.
4.2. Implementation
Three subnetworks were trained with the corresponding data modalities extracted from the
datasets described above. The color body parts segmentation images and 3D skeleton joints were
extracted ﬁrst from the dataset to separately train corresponding subnetworks. The color body parts
segmentation images were obtained by the ReﬁneNet network, pretrained with UP-3D dataset as
described in Section 3. We used the Pytorch framework of the ReﬁneNet network, which was provided
publicly. The 3D skeleton joints information was estimated by the Pose_3D network with the pretrained
weight on the large dataset Human3.6M.
For two-stream networks for RGB and color-encoded body parts segmentation modalities,
they were pretrained with UCF101—action recognition dataset [31]. The optimal settings for the LSTM
network comprise of three memory blocks, and 256 LSTM Cells per memory blocks as in [32].
We combined the output scores of three subnetworks and fed it into the integrated stacking
module to generate the ﬁnal gesture class prediction. This multi-modality fusion is trained after
subnetworks generate their own outputs.

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 6188
10 of 13
The adaptive moment estimation [33] was used to optimize the parameters during the training
process due to its eﬀectiveness with a large number of parameters. We utilized the adaptive learning
rate method to get the optimal parameters of the model.
All of the above codes were run with Nvidia GTX 1080 Ti GPU. The experiment was conducted
with PC of CPU i7-7700 and 32GB of memory. It took 2–4 days per dataset for the experiment but the
primary concern was the performance, which we mainly focused on.
4.3. Results
The performance of the proposed approach for gesture recognition was evaluated by the
experiments conducted on four presented datasets: UTD multimodal human action dataset, gaming
3D dataset, NTU RGB+D dataset, and MSRDailyActivity3D dataset. Comparisons of the results with
previous approaches are reported in Table 1.
Table 2 shows the comparison of the proposed network with existing networks on diﬀerent
datasets [7,8,19,34–40]. The comparison shows that the proposed network outperformed the existing
works. Note that the combination of the three subnetworks was better than each single data modality
network as shown in Table 3. The color body part segmentation modality produced better performance
than the RGB modality due to the removal of background noise. Classiﬁcation of gestures by important
change detection with the spatiotemporal interest point (STIP) [36] also exhibited the eﬀectiveness of
the proposed method. The proposed method was outperformed by only [37] in which additional sensor
devices like an accelerometer or gyroscope were utilized in addition to the RGB input. These sensors
were available only on special circumstances.
Table 2. Gesture classiﬁcation performance with diﬀerent datasets (‘-‘: not available).
Datasets/Methods
UTD Multimodal
Human Action
Gaming 3D
NTU
RGB+D
MSRDaily
Activity3D
C3D [7]
85.3
89.1
83.3
87.5
LRCN [8]
83.0
-
-
-
ST-GCN [19]
-
-
88.3
-
I3D [34]
90.7
93.8
85.8
88.4
T_C3D [35]
89.5
90.3
85.7
88.9
STIP [36]
70.3
-
-
-
[37] (RGB, Accelerometer, Gyroscope)
97.6
-
-
-
TSSI + GLAN + SSAN [38]
-
-
89.1
-
Structure Preserving Projection (RGB+ Depth) [39]
-
-
-
89.8
ScTPM + CS-Mltp(RGB+ Depth) [40]
-
-
-
90.6
Proposed method
96.7
95.3
90.4
90.3
Table 3. Gesture classiﬁcation performance in each modality and the fusion result on the UTD
multimodal human action dataset.
Method
Accuracy (%)
3D_ResNet (RGB)
92.1
3D_ResNet (color body part segmentation)
94.6
LSTM (3D skeleton joints)
95.4
Fusion Result
96.7
For the NTU RGB+D dataset, to compare with the related model using only the RGB data input,
our proposed method achieved outstanding results. While the ST-GCN network [19], which used
a spatial–temporal graph convolutional network for a sequence of skeleton graphs, and the TSSI +
GLAN + SSAN network [38], which utilized a two-branch attention architecture on skeleton images,
obtained the highest accuracy in the literature, our method outperformed as shown in Table 1.
In the MSRDailyActivity3D dataset, our method outperformed the quality networks for video
classiﬁcation with only RGB video data input such as C3D, T_C3D, or I3D. Comparing with two

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 6188
11 of 13
state-of-the-art models, the structure preserving projection method [39] and ScTPM + CS-Mltp [40],
our method had the same or even a close performance.
5. Conclusions
In this paper, we presented a novel approach for dynamic gesture recognition by using RGB
images. This approach is a combination of two 3D_ResNet networks and one LSTM network to beneﬁt
from multi-modalities of RGB frames, 3D skeleton joint information, and color body part segmentation.
The output scores of the submodels were fused at the integrated stacking module to obtain the ﬁnal
gesture class prediction. The eﬀectiveness of the proposed method was shown by the experimental
results on four public datasets.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, G.-S.L. and N.-H.N.; methodology, N.-H.N.; writing—review and
editing, N.-H.N., T.-D.-T.P. and G.-S.L.; supervision, G.-S.L., S.-H.K. and H.-J.Y.; project administration, G.-S.L.,
S.-H.K. and H.-J.Y.; funding acquisition, G.-S.L., S.-H.K. and H.-J.Y. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (NRF-2018R1D1A3B05049058) and NRF funded
by MSIT(NRF-2020R1A4A1019191).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Hussein, M.E.; Torki, M.; Gowayyed, M.A.; El-Saban, M. Human action recognition using a temporal
hierarchy of covariance descriptors on 3d joint locations. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Third International
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beijing, China, 3–19 August 2013; Volume 13, pp. 2466–2472.
2.
Dardas, N.H.; Georganas, N.D. Real-time hand gesture detection and recognition using bag-of-features and
support vector machine techniques. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2011, 60, 3592–3607. [CrossRef]
3.
Lee, H.K.; Kim, J.H. An HMM-based threshold model approach for gesture recognition. IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell. 1999, 21, 961–973.
4.
Feichtenhofer, C.; Pinz, A.; Zisserman, A. Convolutional two-stream network fusion for video action
recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
Las Vegas, NV, USA, 26 June–1 July 2016; pp. 1933–1941.
5.
Karpathy, A.; Toderici, G.; Shetty, S.; Leung, T.; Sukthankar, R.; Fei-Fei, L. Large-scale video classiﬁcation
with convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, Columbus, OH, USA, 23–28 June 2014; pp. 1725–1732.
6.
Ohn-Bar, E.; Trivedi, M.M. Hand gesture recognition in real time for automotive interfaces: A multimodal
vision-based approach and evaluations. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2014, 15, 2368–2377. [CrossRef]
7.
Tran, D.; Bourdev, L.; Fergus, R.; Torresani, L.; Paluri, M. Learning spatiotemporal features with 3d
convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, Santiago,
Chile, 7–13 December 2015; pp. 4489–4497.
8.
Donahue, J.; Anne Hendricks, L.; Guadarrama, S.; Rohrbach, M.; Venugopalan, S.; Saenko, K.; Darrell, T.
Long-term recurrent convolutional networks for visual recognition and description. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Boston, MA, USA, 7–12 June 2015;
pp. 2625–2634.
9.
Duan, J.; Zhou, S.; Wan, J.; Guo, X.; Li, S.Z. Multi-Modality Fusion based on consensus-voting and 3D
convolution for isolated gesture recognition. arXiv 2016, arXiv:1611.06689.
10.
Chai, X.; Liu, Z.; Yin, F.; Liu, Z.; Chen, X. Two streams recurrent neural networks for large-scale continuous
gesture recognition. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR),
Cancun, Mexico, 4–8 December 2016; pp. 31–36.
11.
Wu, D.; Pigou, L.; Kindermans, P.J.; Le, N.D.H.; Shao, L.; Dambre, J.; Odobez, J.M. Deep dynamic neural
networks for multimodal gesture segmentation and recognition. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2016,
38, 1583–1597. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 6188
12 of 13
12.
Hara, K.; Kataoka, H.; Satoh, Y. Can spatiotemporal 3D CNNs retrace the history of 2D CNNs and ImageNet?
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Salt Lake City, UT,
USA, 18–22 June 2018; pp. 6546–6555.
13.
Lin, G.; Milan, A.; Shen, C.; Reid, I. ReﬁneNet: Multi-path reﬁnement networks for high-resolution semantic
segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Honolulu,
HI, USA, 21–26 July 2017; pp. 1925–1934.
14.
Rayat Imtiaz Hossain, M.; Little, J.J. Exploiting temporal information for 3D human pose estimation. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision, Munich, Germany, 8–14 September 2018;
pp. 68–84.
15.
Kopuklu, O.; Kose, N.; Rigoll, G. Motion fused frames: Data level fusion strategy for hand gesture recognition.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA, 18–22 June 2018; pp. 2103–2111.
16.
Molchanov, P.; Yang, X.; Gupta, S.; Kim, K.; Tyree, S.; Kautz, J. Online detection and classiﬁcation of dynamic
hand gestures with recurrent 3D convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 27–30 June 2016; pp. 4207–4215.
17.
Tran, D.; Ray, J.; Shou, Z.; Chang, S.F.; Paluri, M. ConvNet architecture search for spatiotemporal feature
learning. arXiv 2017, arXiv:1708.05038, preprint.
18.
Luvizon, D.C.; Picard, D.; Tabia, H. 2D/3D Pose estimation and action recognition using multitask deep
learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA, 18–22 June 2018; pp. 5137–5146.
19.
Yan, S.; Xiong, Y.; Lin, D. Spatial temporal graph convolutional networks for skeleton-based action recognition.
In Proceedings of the Thirty-second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, New Orleans, LA, USA, 2–7
February 2018.
20.
Li, M.; Chen, S.; Chen, X.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, Y.; Tian, Q. Actional-structural graph convolutional networks for
skeleton-based action recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, Long Beach, CA, USA, 16–20 June 2019; pp. 3595–3603.
21.
Omran, M.; Lassner, C.; Pons-Moll, G.; Gehler, P.; Schiele, B. Neural body ﬁtting: Unifying deep learning
and model based human pose and shape estimation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on 3D
Vision, Verona, Italy, 5–8 September 2018; pp. 484–494.
22.
Fu, K.; Zhao, Q.; Gu, I.Y.H. Reﬁnet: A deep segmentation assisted reﬁnement network for salient object
detection. IEEE Trans. Multimed. 2018, 21, 457–469. [CrossRef]
23.
He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Las Vegas, NV, USA, 27–30 June 2016; pp. 770–778.
24.
Lassner, C.; Romero, J.; Kiefel, M.; Bogo, F.; Black, M.J.; Gehler, P.V. Unite the people: Closing the loop
between 3d and 2d human representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, Honolulu, HI, USA, 21–26 July 2017; pp. 6050–6059.
25.
Newell, A.; Yang, K.; Deng, J. Stacked hourglass networks for human pose estimation. In Proceedings of the
European Conference on Computer Vision, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 11–14 October 2016; pp. 483–499.
26.
Ionescu, C.; Papava, D.; Olaru, V.; Sminchisescu, C. Human3.6m: Large scale datasets and predictive methods
for 3d human sensing in natural environments. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2013, 36, 1325–1339.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Chen, C.; Jafari, R.; Kehtarnavaz, N. UTD-MHAD: A multimodal dataset for human action recognition
utilizing a depth camera and a wearable inertial sensor. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Image Processing, Quebec City, QC, Canada, 27–30 September 2015; pp. 168–172.
28.
Bloom, V.; Makris, D.; Argyriou, V. G3D: A gaming action dataset and real time action recognition evaluation
framework. In Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Workshops, Providence, RI, USA, 16–21 June 2012; pp. 7–12.
29.
Shahroudy, A.; Liu, J.; Ng, T.T.; Wang, G. NTU RGB+D: A large scale dataset for 3D human activity analysis.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Las Vegas, NV, USA,
27–30 June 2016; pp. 1010–1019.
30.
Wang, J.; Liu, Z.; Wu, Y.; Yuan, J. Mining actionlet ensemble for action recognition with depth cameras.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Providence, RI, USA,
16–21 June 2012; pp. 1290–1297.

Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 6188
13 of 13
31.
Soomro, K.; Zamir, A.R.; Shah, M. UCF101: A dataset of 101 human action classes from video in the wild.
arXiv 2012, arXiv:1212.0402, preprint.
32.
Sarkar, A.; Gepperth, A.; Handmann, U.; Kopinski, T. Dynamic hand gesture recognition for mobile systems
using deep LSTM. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Human Computer Interaction,
Evry, France, 11–13 December 2017; pp. 19–31.
33.
Kingma, D.P.; Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference for Learning Representations, San Diego, CA, USA, 7–9 May 2015.
34.
Carreira, J.; Zisserman, A. Quo vadis, action recognition?
In A new model and the kinetics dataset.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Honolulu, HI, USA,
21–26 July 2017; pp. 6299–6308.
35.
Liu, K.; Liu, W.; Gan, C.; Tan, M.; Ma, H. T-C3D: Temporal convolutional 3D network for real-time action
recognition. In Proceedings of the Thirty-second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, New Orleans,
LA, USA, 2–7 February 2018.
36.
Mahjoub, A.B.; Atri, M. Human action recognition using RGB data. In Proceedings of the 11th International
Design & Test Symposium, Hammamet, Tunisia, 18–20 December 2016; pp. 83–87.
37.
Ehatisham-Ul-Haq, M.; Javed, A.; Azam, M.A.; Malik, H.M.; Irtaza, A.; Lee, I.H.; Mahmood, M.T. Robust
human activity recognition using multimodal feature-level fusion.
IEEE Access 2019, 7, 60736–60751.
[CrossRef]
38.
Yang, Z.; Li, Y.; Yang, J.; Luo, J. Action recognition with spatio-temporal visual attention on skeleton image
sequences. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol. 2018, 29, 2405–2415. [CrossRef]
39.
Yu, M.; Liu, L.; Shao, L. Structure-preserving binary representations for RGB-D action recognition. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2015, 38, 1651–1664. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Luo, J.; Wang, W.; Qi, H. Spatio-temporal feature extraction and representation for RGB-D human action
recognition. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 2014, 50, 139–148. [CrossRef]
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

