ViT-HGR: Vision Transformer-based Hand Gesture Recognition from
High Density Surface EMG Signals*
Mansooreh Montazerin1, Soheil Zabihi1, Elahe Rahimian2, Arash Mohammadi1,2, and Farnoosh Naderkhani2
Abstract— Recently, there has been a surge of signiﬁcant
interest on application of Deep Learning (DL) models to
autonomously perform hand gesture recognition using surface
Electromyogram (sEMG) signals. DL models are, however,
mainly designed to be applied on sparse sEMG signals.
Furthermore, due to their complex structure, typically, we
are faced with memory constraints; require large training
times and a large number of training samples, and; there
is the need to resort to data augmentation and/or transfer
learning. In this paper, for the ﬁrst time (to the best of our
knowledge), we investigate and design a Vision Transformer
(ViT) based architecture to perform hand gesture recognition
from High Density (HD-sEMG) signals. Intuitively speaking, we
capitalize on the recent breakthrough role of the transformer
architecture in tackling different complex problems together
with its potential for employing more input parallelization via
its attention mechanism. The proposed Vision Transformer-
based Hand Gesture Recognition (ViT-HGR) framework can
overcome the aforementioned training time problems and can
accurately classify a large number of hand gestures from
scratch without any need for data augmentation and/or transfer
learning. The efﬁciency of the proposed ViT-HGR framework
is evaluated using a recently-released HD-sEMG dataset con-
sisting of 65 isometric hand gestures. Our experiments with
64-sample (31.25 ms) window size yield average test accuracy
of 84.62 ± 3.07%, where only 78, 210 number of parameters
is utilized. The compact structure of the proposed ViT-based
ViT-HGR framework (i.e., having signiﬁcantly reduced number
of trainable parameters) shows great potentials for its practical
application for prosthetic control.
I. INTRODUCTION
Thanks to the recent evolution in the ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial In-
telligence (AI), speciﬁcally Deep Neural Networks (DNNs),
signiﬁcant advancements are expected on development of
highly functional hand prostheses for upper limb amputees.
Generally speaking, such advanced prosthesis systems are,
typically, designed using surface Electromyogram (sEMG)
signals [1]–[5], representing action potentials of the muscle
ﬁbers [6]. The sEMG signals, after passing through a pre-
processing stage, could be a valuable input for DNN archi-
tectures to perform different tasks including but not limited
to motor control, prosthetic device control, and/or hand
motion classiﬁcation. Researchers are, therefore, turning their
attention to development of DL-based Human Machine Inter-
face (HMI) algorithms using sEMG signals to design more
accurate and more efﬁcient myoelectric prosthesis control
*This Project was partially supported by the Department of National De-
fence’s Innovation for Defence Excellence and Security (IDEAS) program,
Canada.
1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Concordat Uni-
versity, Montreal, Canada
1Concordia Institute for Information System Engineering (CITIES), Con-
cordat University, Montreal, Canada
systems. The ultimate goal is improving quality of life of
individuals suffering from amputated limbs.
The sEMG signals are generally classiﬁed into two main
categories, i.e., sparse and high-density [7]–[9]. Both of these
multi-channel signals are acquired from a grid of electrodes
placed on stump muscles to record the electrical activities
and temporal information of the muscle tissue. Although
using a large number of electrodes makes the computational
process challenging, there has been a surge of recent interest
in the use of High-Density sEMG (HD-sEMG) signals. More
speciﬁcally, HD-sEMG signals are capable of recording both
temporal and spatial information of the whole muscle [10].
Furthermore, by placing a large number of electrodes on
the recording area, HD-sEMG provides noticeably high
resolution signals compared to those obtained from sparse
electrodes. This particular method improves the sparsity of
the information that is collected from the muscle ﬁbers,
which results in improved classiﬁcation efﬁciency. Moreover,
these signals are independent of the exact position of the
electrodes [11], [12], therefore, small variations in the posi-
tion of the 2-Dimensional (2D) grid does not considerably
impact the quality of the signals. Thus, development of
advanced processing/learning models based on HD-sEMG
signals is of signiﬁcant importance to perform hand gesture
recognition with high accuracy for design of myoelectric
prosthesis.
Literature Review: Among the most prevalent approaches
adopted for the task of hand gesture recognition, we can
refer to the traditional Machine Learning (ML) methods such
as Linear Discriminator Analysis (LDA) and Support Vector
Machines (SVMs). These methods can achieve reasonable
accuracy only when dealing with small data sets with a
limited number of classes. However, when it comes to large
data sets, most of conventional ML algorithms fail to perform
at the same performance level. For such scenarios, DNNs are
attractive alternatives to perform the recognition tasks with
high accuracy. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [13]–
[16], for instance, have been widely used for classiﬁcation of
sEMG signals by converting them into 2D images. However,
such an approach is not always practical because it only
considers the spatial domain of sEMG signals, ignoring their
sequential nature. To jointly incorporate temporal and spatial
characteristics of multi-channel sEMG signals, several hybrid
models, that combine CNNs with Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNN), have been proposed [17], [18]. For instance, authors
in [17] translated raw sEMG signals using six sEMG image
representation techniques, which are then provided as input
arXiv:2201.10060v1  [cs.CV]  25 Jan 2022

to a hybrid CNN-RNN model. The outcomes of [17] eventu-
ally show that the accuracy of image classiﬁcation is highly
dependent on the quality of the constructed image, making
the key question on “What would be the best procedure
for producing images from sEMG signals?” still not fully
resolved [19]. In spite of their remarkable contributions
to sequence modelling, hybrid CNN-RNN models fail to
pass the entire computations for training to parallel blocks
because of their innately sequential structure [20]. This
raises some issues such as memory constraints and longer
training times when working with large sequences. The paper
aims to address this issue via incorporation of transformer
architectures.
Contributions: In this paper, for the ﬁrst time (to the best
of our knowledge), we investigate and design a Transformer-
based architecture [20] to perform hand gesture recognition
from HD-sEMG signals. Intuitively speaking, we capitalize
on the recent breakthrough role of the Transformer archi-
tecture in tackling different complex ML problems together
with its great potential for employing more input paralleliza-
tion with attention mechanism. Since HD-sEMG data sets
have a 3-Dimensional (3D) structure, Vision Transformers
(ViT) [21] can be considered as an appropriate architecture
to address the challenges identiﬁed above. The proposed
Vision Transformer-based Hand Gesture Recognition (ViT-
HGR) framework can overcome training time problems and
evaluation accuracy that we mostly face while working with
other similar networks such as the conventional ML algo-
rithms or the more advanced DNNs such as Long Short-Term
Memories (LSTMs). However, we cannot directly provide
HD-sEMG signals as input to the ViTs, and particular signal
processing steps are required to modify the signal into a
format that is compatible with the ViT’s input. Therefore,
the proposed ViT-HGR architecture converts the main signal
into smaller portions using a speciﬁc window size and then
feeds each of these portions to the ViT for further analysis.
In brief, contributions of this work are as follows:
• A Transformer-based architecture, referred to as the
ViT-HGR framework, is designed for the ﬁrst time, to
the best of our knowledge, to perform hand gesture
recognition from HD-sEMG signals.
• As direct application of ViT to HD-sEMG is not pos-
sible and straightforward, a particular signal processing
step is developed to convert the HD-sEMG signals to
a speciﬁc format that is compatible with ViTs. In other
words, the proposed ViT-based ViT-HGR framework
can learn from HD-sEMG signals rather than images.
• The proposed ViT-HGR framework can accurately clas-
sify a large number of hand gestures from scratch
without any need for data augmentation and/or transfer
learning.
To develop and evaluate the proposed ViT-HGR framework,
we used a recently-released HD-sEMG dataset consisting
of 65 isometric hand gestures and 128 distinct channels
for recording the signals [22]. Our results show superior
performance of the ViT-HGR framework compared to its
counterparts illustrating reduced training time and increased
testing accuracy.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows:
The utilized dataset and initial preprocessing procedure are
introduced in Section II. The proposed ViT-HGR framework
together with steps used to prepare HD-sEMG signals to
be fed to the ViT architecture are discussed in Section III.
Experimental results are presented in Section IV. Finally,
Section V concludes the paper.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. The Dataset
The proposed ViT-HGR framework is developed based on
a database of HD-sEMG signals obtained from 20 subjects
that performed 65 isometric hand gestures plus a gesture that
was repeated twice (66 gestures in total) [22]. Following
initial evaluations, one subjects is disregarded because of
its partial information. Two grids each comprising of 64
electrodes (8 × 8) were placed on the ﬂexor and extensor
muscles of the participants and they were asked to repeat
each movement 5 times with ﬁve seconds rest intervals. Sig-
nals were recorded via the Quattrocento (OT Bioelettronica,
Torino, Italia) biomedical ampliﬁer system and were sampled
at 2, 048 Hz frequency. The train and test sets were not
mentioned in [22]. Therefore, we perform a 5-fold cross
validation to provide the bases for fair evaluations with future
works. More speciﬁcally, the dataset is presented in ﬁve
repetitions, where each time one repetition is used as the test
set while the remaining repetitions are used as the training
set. The test repetition, therefore, is changing each time and
the ﬁnal result is presented based on the average accuracy
for each fold.
B. Initial Preprocessing
The raw dataset consists of plenty of sharp ﬂuctuations
that commonly occur in the EMG signals. Not only are these
ﬂuctuations required for an accurate gesture recognition task
but they also prevent the network from training the useful
information and increasing its accuracy. As a result, we ﬁlter
the signals of each electrode separately with a ﬁrst-order low-
pass butterworth ﬁlter, which yields the positive envelope of
each channel. Filtered signals are then passed through a µ-
law normalization given by
F(xt) = sign(xt)ln
 1 + µ|xt|

ln
 1 + µ

,
(1)
where xt represents the EMG signal for each channel and
µ is the parameter to which the signal is scaled. As shown
in [23], normalizing the signals increases the discriminative
power of the network.
III. THE PROPOSED VIT-HGR FRAMEWORK
The proposed ViT-HGR framework is implemented based
on the transformers and attention mechanism [21]. The at-
tention mechanism incorporated with CNNs and the LSTMs
were formerly used for the hand movement classiﬁcation
tasks because of their proven ability to leverage the temporal
information of the sEMG signals [17]. However, in this work,

Fig. 1.
A graphical representation of the Vision Transformer: (a) A cropped portion of the original signal is fed to the ViT and converted to small patches.
These patches go through a patch + position embedding layer and a class token is prepended to them. They are then inputted to the transformer encoder.
(b) The transformer encoder that is a combination of Multi-head Self-Attention, Multilayer Perceptron and two Add&Norm layers.
we indicate that the attention framework itself is sufﬁcient
to surpass the other networks and because of our data
preparation approach, there is no need for data augmentation.
The overall structure of the proposed ViT-HGR architec-
ture is shown in Fig. 1. The ViT is designed to have a 3D
image as an input, which is then reshaped to a sequence
of ﬂat 2D patches with a predetermined length. In order
to convert the HD-EMG signals to the acceptable input for
the ViT, we ﬁrst split the whole sequence into multiple
sections utilizing a sliding window of 64 samples (31.25
ms considering the 2, 048 Hz sampling frequency) with
a skip step equal to 32 samples. It is worth mentioning
that the window length should be less than 300 ms to
satisfy the acceptable delay time [24], which is the real-time
response required for practical myoelectric prosthetic control.
Therefore, the window length for the classiﬁcation purpose
cannot surpass 300 ms [24]. Although using a larger window
size potentially leads to better performance, use of shorter
windows (e.g., 31.25 ms) is preferred allowing extra neces-
sary time for practical implementation in real scenarios. After
the windowing step, each of the (window size, Nch, Ncv)
sequences, where Nch is the number of horizontal channels
and Ncv is the number of vertical channels, are considered
as the 3D input of the ViT and is divided into small square
patches in the Patch Embedding block. The sequence of
patches is then fed to a linear projection trainable layer (E)
and a class token (xcls) is created and put at the beginning of
this sequence. The class token here is exclusively responsible
for holding all the learned information during the training
and is then used in the last layer to detect the gestures. In
order to maintain the positional information of the signals
throughout the training phase, a positional embedding vector
goes through the transformer’s encoder block together with
each patch. The aforementioned steps provides the input (Z0)
to the transformer encoder as follows:
Z0 = [xcls; xp
1E; xp
2E; . . . ; xp
NE] + Epos.
(2)
The encoder block is a standard transformer encoder which
is introduced by [20] and has L identical layers in total.
Each layer consists of two principal blocks called the “Multi-
Head Self Attention” (MSA) and the “Feed Forward”. The
former is assigned for the attention mechanism while the
latter acts as a position-wise Multilayer Perceptron (MLP). In
the MSA block, there are H number of identical heads with
distinct learnable parameters operating in parallel. These
heads separately accept 1/H of the total length of Keys
(K), Queries (Q) and Values (V ) and after performing the
following scaled dot-product attention
SA(Z) = softmax(QKT
√dh
)V ,
(3)
MSA(Z) = [SA1(Z); SA2(Z); . . . ; SAh(Z)]W MSA, (4)
concatenate the outputs and transfer them to the MLP layer.
The ﬁnal output of the transformer after passing the MSA
and MLP layers can be shown as the following matrix
ZL = [zL0; zL1; . . . ; zLN],
(5)
where N is the number of patches and
Z
′
l
=
MSA(LayerNorm(Zl−1)) + Zl−1,
(6)
Zl
=
MLP(LayerNorm(Z
′
l)) + Z
′
l,
(7)
for 1 ≤l ≤L. In Eq. (5), zL0 is a vector holding all the
useful information and is ﬁnally passed through a linear layer
to produce the classiﬁcation vector.

TABLE I
MODEL IDS AND THEIR PARAMETERS
Model ID
MLP Size
Embed Dimension
I
384
192
II
96
96
III
48
48
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
We evaluate our proposed framework on all the 65 various
hand gestures of the dataset and considered 3 distinct models,
in which MLP size and the Embedding dimension are
different. For each model a window size of 64 samples (31.25
ms) is tested to assess the impact of increasing the window
size on performance of ViTs. The patch size, models’ depth
and the number of heads in all of the models are set to
(4, 4), 1 , 12 respectively. Adam optimization method is
deployed with (β1 , β2) equal to (0.9, 0.999), with the
learning rate of 0.0001 and the weight decay of 0.001. We
ﬁx the batch size and the number of epochs to 128 and
30 respectively and use the Cross-entropy loss function for
calculating the models’ performance. The Model IDs and
their corresponding parameters are presented in Table I.
Table II demonstrates the average accuracy over 19 sub-
jects for each repetition, the average accuracy after perform-
ing 5-fold cross validation (i.e., Acc. F1 to Acc. F5) and the
corresponding Standard Deviation (STD) for each model. It
also shows how many parameters are trained for each speciﬁc
model. As can be seen, the highest accuracy, in general,
pertains to the 3rd repetition and the lowest to the 1st one. The
average accuracy rises by 0.38% from model I to model II
although the number of parameters in the former is roughly
4 times as large as that in the latter. This indicates that to
obtain decent accuracy in ViTs, there is no need to increase
the number of parameters and hence the complexity and the
training time when this accuracy is achieved with almost
78, 000 parameters. The STD also decreases by a minimal
amount when increasing the number of parameters, leading
to a reasonable trade-off between the number of parameters
on the one hand and the acquired accuracy and STD on the
other hand. Fig. 2 visualizes the results from Table II.
For comparison purposes, the proposed ViT-based frame-
work is evaluated against the LDA approach, which is
among the most popular conventional ML algorithms that
has been widely used for sEMG gesture recognition. We
should mention that as the utilized dataset has been released
very recently, there are only couple of other works [25],
[27] developed based on this dataset. Reference [25] focused
on the same task as our work but used traditional ML
methods such as LDA. The test-train split, however, is not
mentioned in Reference [25] rendering direct comparison
inapplicable. Reference [27], on the other hand, only focused
on the dynamic and transient phase of gesture movements
when the signals are not stabilized or plateaued, which is
a different task as this work. Consequently, to have a fair
comparison, we have implemented an LDA method similar
Fig. 2.
Accuracy boxplots of 3 different models of the ViT-HGR frame-
work. Each boxplot represents the Interquartile Range for 19 subjects. The
accuracy for each subject is the average accuracy after performing 5-fold
cross validation.
to that of [25] based on the same setting as our proposed
ViT framework. Five key features for classiﬁcation of sEMG
signals including Mean Absolute Value (MAV), the number
of Zero Crossings (ZC), Waveform Length (WL), Root Mean
Square (RMS) and Slope Sign Change (SSC) along with
four auto regressive coefﬁcients of each cropped window
are fed to the LDA algorithm [25], [26]. In Table III, the
above-mentioned results obtained from the LDA model are
presented. Evidently, the average accuracy in the ViT is
around 5% bigger and STD is around 8% smaller than that
in the LDA, which highlights the great power of ViTs in
solving HD-sEMG hand movement classiﬁcation problems.
Furthermore, the signal processing + training time for both
ViT-HGRand LDA and for each repetition of one subject is
measured. This time is 168 seconds for the ViT-HGR model
I and 367 seconds for the LDA, which means for achieving
the total average accuracy over all the 19 subjects, we require
4.4 hours while this will be 9.6 hours for the LDA.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, for the ﬁrst time (to the best of our knowl-
edge), we introduced a vision transformer-based framework,
referred to as the ViT-HGR, for application on HD-sEMG
signals for the task of hand gesture classiﬁcation. To imple-
ment the ViT-HGR framework, we capitalize on the recent
breakthrough of Transformers in different ML domains and
their potentials for employing more input parallelization,
therefore, reducing complexity of the underlying model. As
direct application of ViT to HD-sEMG is not straightforward,
a particular signal processing step is developed to convert the
HD-sEMG signals to a speciﬁc format that is compatible with
ViTs. The proposed ViT-HGR framework can overcome the
training time problems associated with recurrent networks
and can accurately classify a large number of hand gestures
from scratch without any need for data augmentation and/or
transfer learning. By comparing the test accuracy associated
with three unique variants of the ViT-HGR network, we
showed that it could reach average accuracy of 84.62%
(for 65 gestures over 19 participants) with no more than
78, 000 parameters. The average accuracy for the LDA is 8%
lower and its signal processing + training time is more than

TABLE II
A COMPARISON OF THE AVERAGE ACCURACY FOR EACH FOLD OVER 19 PARTICIPANTS, THE OVERALL ACCURACY AND THE OVERALL STD FOR
EACH VIT MODEL.
Model ID
Acc. F1 (%)
Acc. F2
Acc. F3
Acc. F4
Acc. F5
Avg. Acc.
STD (%)
# Parameters
I
75.92
87.79
88.47
87.71
83.22
84.62
3.07
340,866
II
75.21
87.34
88
87.88
82.78
84.24
3.14
78,210
III
73.92
87.09
87.56
87.09
81.65
83.46
3.17
25,314
TABLE III
A COMPARISON OF THE AVERAGE ACCURACY FOR EACH REPETITION
OVER 19 PARTICIPANTS, THE OVERALL ACCURACY AND THE OVERALL
STD FOR THE LDA MODEL.
Acc. F1 (%) Acc. F2 Acc. F3 Acc. F4 Acc. F5 Avg. Acc. STD (%)
82.58
69.65
84.21
82.74
75.27
78.89
11.15
twice that of the ViT-HGR. This illustrates potentials of the
proposed ViT-HGR framework to act as a feasible substitute
for LDAs in hand gesture recognition tasks. This is because
the ViTs are more straightforward to be implemented on
HD-sEMG data sets with no need for any additional feature
extraction calculations and it also takes far less training time,
which is a signiﬁcantly critical issue when working with
large data sets. Our primary focus in this paper was on 64-
sample portions of the ﬂexor signals because our purpose
was to assess the proposed network’s performance on small
patterns of the HD-sEMG dataset. In the future, we aim to
extend the number of channels to evaluate its impact on the
framework’s efﬁcacy.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Farina, A. Mohammadi, T. Adali, N. V. Thakor, and K. N.
Plataniotis, “Signal Processing for Neurorehabilitation and Assistive
Technologies” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 38, no. 4, pp.
5-7, 2021.
[2] S. Tam, M. Boukadoum, A. Campeau-Lecours, and B. Gosselin,
“Intuitive Real-time Control strategy for High-density Myoelectric
Hand Prosthesis Using Deep and Transfer Learning.”
Scientiﬁc
Reports, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1-14, 2021.
[3] J. Vogel, and A. Hagengruber, “An sEMG-based Interface to Give
People with Severe Muscular Atrophy Control over Assistive Devices.”
IEEE Int. Conf. of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society
(EMBC), pp. 2136-2141, 2018.
[4] M. Zia ur Rehman, et al., “Stacked Sparse Autoencoders for EMG-
based Classiﬁcation of Hand Motions: A Comparative Multi Day
Analyses between Surface and Intramuscular EMG,” Appl. Sci., vol.
8, p. 1126, 2018.
[5] E. Rahimian, S. Zabihi, A. Asif, D. Farina, S.F. Atashzar, A. Moham-
madi, “FS-HGR: Few-shot Learning for Hand Gesture Recognition via
ElectroMyography,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., 2021.
[6] P. Koch, M. Dreier, M. Maass, M. B¨ohme, H. Phan, A. and Mertins,
“A Recurrent Neural Network for Hand Gesture Recognition Based on
Accelerometer Data,” IEEE Int. Conf. of the Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society (EMBC), pp. 5088-5091, 2019.
[7] D. Bai, S. Chen, and J. Yang, “Upper Arm Motion High-density sEMG
Recognition Optimization Based on Spatial and Time-frequency Do-
main Features,” Journal of Healthcare Engineering, 2019.
[8] I. Ketyk´o, F. Kov´acs, and K. Z. Varga, “Domain Adaptation for sEMG-
based Gesture Recognition with Recurrent Neural Networks,” IEEE
Int. Joint Conf. Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1-7, 2019.
[10] M. Houston, A. Wu, Y. and Zhang, “Optimizing Input for Gesture
Recognition using Convolutional Networks on HD-sEMG Instanta-
neous Images,” IEEE Int. Conf. of the Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society (EMBC), pp. 6539-6542, 2021.
[9] U. Kuruganti, A. Pradhan, and J. Toner, “High-Density Electromyog-
raphy Provides Improved Understanding of Muscle Function for Those
with Amputation,” Frontiers in Medical Technology, vol. 41, 2021.
[11] J. Chen, S. Bi, G. Zhang, and G. Cao,
“High-density Surface
EMG-based Gesture Recognition Using a 3D Convolutional Neural
Network.,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 4, p. 1201, 2020.
[12] X. Jiang, X. Liu, J. Fan, et al., “Open Access Dataset, Toolbox and
Benchmark Processing Results of High-Density Surface Electromyo-
gram Recordings.,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 29,
pp. 1035-1046, 2021.
[13] S. Shen, K. Gu, X. R. Chen, M. Yang, and R. C. Wang, “Movements
Classiﬁcation of Multi-channel sEMG Based on CNN and Stacking
Ensemble Learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 137489-137500, 2019.
[14] A. Gautam, M. Panwar, A. Wankhede, S. P. Arjunan, G. R. Naik, A.
Acharyya, and D. K. Kumar, “Locomo-net: A Low-complex Deep
Learning Framework for sEMG-based Hand Movement Recognition
for Prosthetic control,” IEEE J. Transl. Eng. Health Med., vol. 8, pp.
1-12, 2020.
[15] T. Triwiyanto, I. P. A. Pawana, and M. H Purnomo, “An Improved
Performance of Deep Learning Based on Convolution Neural Network
to Classify The Hand Motion by Evaluating Hyper Parameter,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 1678-1688, 2020
[16] W. Wei, et al.,
“A Multi-stream Convolutional Neural Network
for sEMG-based Gesture Recognition in Muscle-computer Interface,”
Pattern Recognition Letters, 2017.
[17] Y. Hu, Y. Wong, W. Wei, Y. Du, M. Kankanhalli, and W. Geng,
“A Novel Attention-based Hybrid CNN-RNN Architecture for sEMG-
based Gesture Recognition,” PloS One, vol. 13, no. 10, 2018.
[18] E. Rahimian, S. Zabihi, S. F. Atashzar, A. Asif, A. Mohammadi, “Sur-
face EMG-Based Hand Gesture Recognition via Hybrid and Dilated
Deep Neural Network Architectures for Neurorobotic Prostheses,”
Journal of Medical Robotics Research, pp. 1-12, 2020.
[19] P. Tsinganos, B. Cornelis, J. Cornelis, B. Jansen, and A. Skodras,
“A Hilbert Curve Based Representation of sEMG Signals for Gesture
Recognition,” International Conference on Systems, Signals and Image
Processing (IWSSIP), pp. 201-206, 2019.
[20] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. Gomez N., L.
Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is All You Need,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 5998-60, 2017.
[21] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, et al., “An Image is Worth
16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
[22] N. Maleˇsevi´c, A. Olsson, P. Sager, et al.,
“A Database of High-
density surface Electromyogram Signals Comprising 65 Isometric
Hand Gestures,” Scientiﬁc Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1-10, 2021.
[23] E. Rahimian, S. Zabihi, F. Atashzar, A. Asif, A. Mohammadi, “Xcep-
tionTime: Independent Time-Window XceptionTime Architecture for
Hand Gesture Classiﬁcation,” IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech,
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2020.
[24] B. Hudgins, P. Parker, and R.N. Scott, “A New Strategy for Multi-
function Myoelectric Control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. vol. 40, no.
1, pp. 82-94, 1993.
[25] R. N. Khushaba, and K. Nazarpour,
“Decoding HD-EMG Signals
for Myoelectric Control - How Small Can the Analysis Window Size
be?,” IEEE Robotics & Automation Letters, vol. 6, no. 4, 2021.
[26] M. Atzori, and H. M¨uller, “PaWFE: Fast Signal Feature Extraction
Using Parallel Time Windows.” Frontiers in Neurorobotics, vol. 13,
p. 74, 2019.
[27] T. Sun, Q. Hu, P. Gulati, and S.F. Atashzar, “Temporal Dilation of
Deep LSTM for Agile Decoding of sEMG: Application in Prediction
of Upper-limb Motor Intention in NeuroRobotics.,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, 2021.

