Vision-based Static Hand Gesture Recognition using
Dense-block Features and SVM classiﬁer
Jaya Prakash Sahoo
Department of ECE
National Institute of Technology
Rourkela, India
sahoo.jprakash@gmail.com
Samit Ari
Department of ECE
National Institute of Technology
Rourkela, India
samit@nitrkl.ac.in
Sarat Kumar Patra
Indian Institute of Information Technology
Vadodara, India
skpatra@iiitvadodara.ac.in
Abstract—Recognition of static hand gesture images using a
vision-based technique remains a challenging task due to the
variations in illumination, shape of the user’s hand, complex
backgrounds, and so on. Further, the current convolutional
neural network (CNN) technique requires large gesture images to
train a model from scratch. Therefore, in this work novel features
are obtained from the dense blocks of the ﬁne-tuned DenseNet 201
to recognize the hand gesture images accurately. The proposed
feature (denoted as DenseFeat) is a combination of features
from last two dense blocks of the ﬁne-tuned DenseNet which
gathers enriched information for a gesture image. In addition,
to remove the redundant information in the feature vector,
the dimension of the DenseFeat is reduced using the principal
component analysis (PCA) approach. A support vector machine
(SVM) classiﬁer based on a linear kernel is used to recognize
the test gesture images. The efﬁcacy of the proposed method
is evaluated on two benchmark datasets using both subject-
independent and subject-dependent cross-validation techniques.
Furthermore, the qualitative and compressive quantitative anal-
ysis of the benchmark datasets illustrates that the proposed
method outperforms state-of-the-art techniques in terms of mean
accuracy and computational time.
Index Terms—DenseNet, DenseFeat, hand gesture recognition,
transfer learning, PCA, SVM
I. INTRODUCTION
For several decades, the vision-based hand gesture recog-
nition (HGR) technique has become a popular research area
due to the high demand for the application in real life with
accurate recognition of hand gestures [1]. In this technique,
the user perform gestures in front of camera with bare hands
and the gestures are recognized using the computer vision
techniques. The HGR systems provide the user greater free-
dom and are more user-friendly [2]. Some key applications
using the hand gesture recognition are [3], [4] includes, sign
language interpretation, clinical health, robotic control, gaming
and virtual interface, etc. However, despite different novel
techniques developed by the researcher, still, hand gesture
recognition in a vision-based environment remains challenging
due to complex background, illumination variations, inter-class
similarities, and diversity in shape and size of a human hand.
Deep convolutional neural network (CNN) technique has
overcome the traditional hand-crafted based approaches due
to automatic feature extraction methods and ability to handle
varied conditions in the datasets [5]. In addition, the automatic
feature extraction technique of the CNN remove the pre-
processing operations such as illumination normalization, hand
region segmentation using a skin colour ﬁlter and so on [6].
Generally, several layers such as convolutional, relu, pooling,
fully connected and dropout layers are added sequentially
to develop a deep CNN architecture. Moreover, training a
deep CNN model from scratch with less gesture samples
is a challenging task. To address the aforementioned issues,
researchers employed the transfer learning method, or the
extraction of deep features from the various intermediate and
fully connected (FC) layers of deep CNNs [6], [7]. Several
research studies [8], [9] have shown that deep CNN for
learning distinguishing features and support vector machines
(SVM) as a classiﬁer outperforms deep CNN with softmax
activation functions. The success of the combined CNN feature
with the SVM classiﬁer encouraged the development of a
hybrid model for HGR in a vision-based environment. In the
proposed technique, novel deep CNN features are obtained
from the dense blocks of the ﬁne-tuned DenseNet 201 and the
gesture classes are recognized using the SVM classiﬁer.
The major contributions of this manuscript are summarized
bellow:
• Novel features are extracted from the dense blocks of
the ﬁne-tuned DenseNet 201 for the accurate recogni-
tion of hand gestures. The proposed feature denoted as
DenseFeat is the concatenation of features from the last
two dense blocks of the DenseNet 201. In particular, the
DenseFeat combines the global information from recep-
tive ﬁelds of the last two dense blocks which leverage
more discriminate information for a gesture image.
• To reduce the redundant information in the DenseFeat
feature dimension reduction approach using principal
component analysis (PCA) technique is applied. The
optimized features are more distinguishable and enable
accurate recognition of gesture poses.
• Extensive experiments have been performed on two stan-
dard datasets such as MU and NUS II datasets and the
proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art meth-
ods using two cross-validation techniques in terms of
accuracy and computational time.
The remainder of the paper is arranged as follows. Section II
includes a review of relevant literature. Section III presents
the framework of the proposed methodology for HGR. The
experimental results and discussion to validate the proposed
2022 IEEE 2nd International Symposium on Sustainable Energy, Signal Processing and Cyber Security (iSSSC) | 978-1-6654-9056-6/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/iSSSC56467.2022.10051475
978-1-6654-9056-6/22/$31.00 @2022 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:55:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

technique is given in section IV. Section V summarizes the
work.
II. RELATED WORKS
Some related and representative works on vision-based
HGR technique are presented in this section. The survey
is categorized into handcrafted-based approaches and CNN-
based techniques.
The contour of the segmented hand gesture images is
used to derive the handcrafted based features. Several novel
handcrafted based feature extraction approaches [10]–[12] are
proposed in the literature to recognize the gesture poses
accurately. A set of geometric features form hand contour
are reported by Fang et al. to represent a gesture pose
[10]. Sparse representation of the hand contour using slope
difference distribution (SDD) feature was proposed by Wang
[11]. To describe a gesture image, a fusion of several image
descriptors: gradient local auto-correlation, fast discrete curve
transform and gabor wavelet transform were obtained from
the hand gestures and the features are optimized using the
PCA technique [12]. However, the aforementioned handcrafted
attributes are inﬂuenced by distortion due to hand shape
caused by improper hand segmentation, variations in lighting
conditions, and complex environments [10].
Deep learning technique has performed well in image recog-
nition from several years. Several CNN architectures have
been reported by the researcher for the recognition of static
hand gestures. A light-weighted intensive feature extraction
deep network (ExtriDeNet) is reported for HGR [13]. For
automatic recognition of hand gesture residual block intensity
feature with a two-stage residual CNN (RBI-2RCNN) [6]
is developed. A hybrid feature attention network (HyFiNet)
was developed for HGR [13]. A combination of various fully
connected layers attributes from two pre-trained CNNs [7]
was presented for automatic HGR. A CNN network based on
feature fusion was proposed [14], in which several handcrafted
features from the hand contour were fused at the ﬁnal FC
layer to recognize a gesture pose. Although deep learning has
excellent generalization capabilities, it demands a completely
developed CNN architecture and large storage capacity.
7UDLQLQJVHW
7HVWLQJVHW
690
FODVVLILHU
)HDWXUH
H[WUDFWLRQ
7UDLQHG
690
5HFRJQL]HG
JHVWXUHSRVH
Training phase
Testing phase
)LQHWXQHG
'HQVH1HW
)HDWXUHH[WUDFWLRQ
'%)0
&
'%)0
3&$
)LQHWXQHG
'HQVH1HW
3&$
Fig. 1.
The framework of the proposed HGR system. The dense block 3
and dense block 4 feature maps are represented here by DB3 and DB4 FM,
respectively.
III. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
The framework of the developed HGR system is shown in
the Fig. 1. The HGR system is divided into two sections:
training and testing. In the training phase, ﬁrst the pre-trained
DenseNet 201 is ﬁne-tuned using the training gesture samples.
The novel features are then extracted from the dense blocks
of ﬁne-tuned DenseNet. The ﬁnal proposed feature (denoted
as DenseFeat) is the concatenation of the information from
the last two dense blocks. The dimension of the proposed
DenseFeat is then reduced using PCA technique. The support
vector machine (SVM) model is developed using the reduced
features. In the testing phase, the test gesture images are
classiﬁed using the trained SVM model with the proposed
feature.
A. Fine-tuning of pre-trained DenseNet 201
DenseNet uses feature reuse concept through dense connec-
tivity among the convolutional (conv) layers in a given dense
block [15]. That means the output feature maps (FM) of the
present conv layer is concatenated with the FM of previous
conv layer. In this way DenseNet enhances gradient ﬂow and
propagation of feature maps among conv layers within a dense
block as shown in Fig. 2. The ith conv layer in a dense block,
receives the concatenation of FM of all the previous layers
represented as Z0, Z1, Z2, ..., Zi−1 as input:
Zi = Hi[Z0, Z1, Z2, ..., Zi−1]
(1)
where [Z0, Z1, Z2, ..., Zi−1] denotes the concatenation of FM
from the previous layers 0, 1, 2, ..., i −1. Hi is known as
composite function. This function comprises three operations:
batch normalization, ReLU, and convolution. The advantages
of DenseNet are (i) it reduces the gradient vanishing problems,
(ii) improve the propagation of features, (iii) inspire the reuse
of features.
Fine-tuning is the process of training a new model on data
from the target hand gesture dataset utilizing weights of a pre-
trained trained CNN. In this work, Densenet 201 CNN model
trained on ImageNet dataset are ﬁne-tuned on the target hand
gesture dataset. In this method, the output nodes in the last
FC layer of the network is modiﬁed to match the total output
classes in the target dataset. After that, the weights of new
network is tuned on the target dataset.
B. Proposed DenseFeat feature
In this subsection, the steps to obtain proposed DenseFeat
is described. The DenseNet 201 architecture consists of four
dense blocks as shown in Fig. 2. In general, the initial layers
of the CNN represents the low level descriptors such as lines,
curves, edges etc. and the deeper layers of the CNN stores
the high level abstract information of the input image [6]. The
proposed feature DenseFeat is obtained from the last two dense
blocks such as dense block 3 (DB3) and dense block 4 (DB4)
as visualized in the Fig. 2. The output of each FM in a dense
block is represented in the form of matrix as
K = [F1, F2, ...Fp]
(2)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:55:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

,QSXWLPDJH
'HQVHEORFN
&RQYROXWLRQ
3RROLQJ
7UDQVLWLRQ
OD\HU
'HQVHEORFN
7UDQVLWLRQ
OD\HU
'HQVHEORFN
7UDQVLWLRQ
OD\HU
'HQVHEORFN
*$3
6RIWPD[
Fine-tuned Densenet201
)HDWXUHPDSV
îî
)HDWXUHPDSV
îî
&RQFDWHQDWLRQ
'HQVH)HDW
Max
Max
Fig. 2.
Extraction of the proposed DenseFeat feature from the ﬁne-tuned
DenseNet 201 CNN.
[Fi]p
i=1 =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎣
f11
f12
· · ·
f1n
f21
f22
· · ·
f2n
...
...
· · ·
...
fm1
fm2
· · ·
fmn
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎦
(3)
where F and p are the learned ﬁlter wights and number of
ﬁlters applied respectively. The global max pooling operation
is performed on each FM to obtain the desired features for a
dense block using the equation given bellow.
F max = [F max
1
, F max
2
, ...F max
p
]
(4)
where, [F max
i
]p
i=1 = max(max(Fi)) is the maximum value
of the each FM. The above features are obtained from the
DB3 and DB4 which are denoted as F max
db3
and F max
db4
respec-
tively. The concatenation of above features is the proposed
feature DenseFeat (Fc) which is represented by the following
equation.
Fc = [F max
db3 , F max
db4 ]
(5)
As shown in the Fig. 2, the feature length after obtaining
features from DB3 and DB4 are 1792 and 1920 respectively.
Therefore, the length of the proposed feature DenseFeat is
3712.
C. PCA based feature dimension reduction
The feature dimension reduction approach is a method for
reducing a higher-dimensional feature vector to a reduced
dimension. In general, redundant features in higher dimen-
sional feature vectors have low variance and are undesirable.
As a result, the goal of dimension reduction is to remove
redundant features in the data. The beneﬁts of feature di-
mension reduction technique are as follows: (i) It decreases
the amount of storage space required during training, (ii)
The training algorithm has become more efﬁcient, and (iii)
eliminates unwanted features and noise from the data. As
illustrated in the Fig. 1, PCA is used to decrease the dimension
TABLE I
DETAILS OF BENCH-MARKED DATASETS USED TO DETERMINE THE
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE PROPOSED METHOD
Dataset
name
No.
of
subjects
No. of ges-
ture class
Total gesture
samples
Challenges
MU [16]
5
36
2515
Illumination,
hand shapes
NUS-II
[17]
40
10
2000
Complex
backgrounds
of DenseFeat. Before applying to the SVM classiﬁer, the ﬁnal
features are normalized using Z-score normalization technique.
D. Hand gesture classiﬁcation
To determine the superior recognition performance for the
proposed features, three different classiﬁers, including artiﬁcial
neural networks (ANN), K-nearest Neighbor (KNN), and
support vector machines (SVM) classiﬁers are utilized. The
performance of the individual classiﬁer is described in the
Section IV.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Experiments are carried out in this section to validate
the datasets, numerous parameter studies, and performance
analyses of the proposed technique.
A. Datasets, experimental setup, and validation methods
1) Bench-marked Datasets: In this work, two vision-based
static hand gesture datasets such as Massey University (MU)
[16] and National University of Singapore (NUS)-II [17]
datasets are used for the experiments. The detail description
of the standard datasets is given in Table I.
2) Experimental setup: The experiments are performed on
MATLAB 2019b platform using a 8GB graphics card. The
hyper-parameters for the ﬁne-tuning process are as follows.:
maximum epoch = 20, momentum = 0.9, batch size=8 and
initial learning rate = 0.001. The stochastic gradient descent
with momentum (SGDM) is used to reduce the loss function.
3) Validation methods:
The efﬁcacy of the proposed
method is evaluated using two cross validation (CV) tests such
as subject independent (SI) [14] and subject dependent (SD)
[13]. The SI CV test, is also known as leave-one-subject-out
,QSXWLPDJH
'HQVHEORFN
'HQVHEORFN
'HQVHEORFN
'HQVHEORFN
Fig. 3. Grad-CAM visualization result at each dense blocks of the ﬁne-tuned
DenseNet 201 CNN model for the given input images on the benchmark
dataset. Top: MU dataset, Bottom: NUS II dataset.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:55:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

D







'HQVH
EORFN
'HQVH
EORFN
'HQVH
EORFN
'HQVH
EORFN
0HDQDFFXUDF\
)HDWXUHVIURPHDFKGHQVHEORFN
08
186,,











08
186,,
0HDQDFFXUDF\
'DWDVHWV
'HQVH)HDW
'HQVH)HDW3&$
G






'HQVH
EORFN
'HQVH
EORFN
'HQVH
EORFN
'HQVH
EORFN
0HDQDFFXUDF\
)HDWXUHVIURPHDFKGHQVHEORFN
08
186,,









08
186,,
0HDQDFFXUDF\
'DWDVHW
'HQVH)HDW
'HQVH)HDW3&$
E
F
Fig. 4. Quantitative performance of proposed method using SI CV test ((a), (b)) and SD CV test ((c), (d)) on standard datasets. (a), and (c) represent results
using features from each dense blocks of DenseNet 201 on SI and SD CV test respectively. (b), and (d) represent the performance comparison between
DenseFeat and DenseFeat with PCA on SI and SD CV test respectively.
(LOO) CV. For the SD CV test, the gesture samples in a
dataset are randomly split into training and testing sets with a
ratio of 70:30. The mean accuracy is determined by repeating
SD CV test ten times.
B. Evaluation of the proposed technique
1) Qualitative analysis using grad-CAM: The qualitative
analysis of the proposed feature is achieved using the gradient-
weighted class activation mapping (grad-CAM) method [18].
This technique uses the gradients of the input gesture im-
age ﬂowing to the last convolutional layer to generate the
localization map. This heat map highlights the important
parts/pixels of the image which contribute more to predict
the ﬁnal gesture class. Fig. 3 shows the grad-CAM results
generated at each dense blocks of the ﬁne-tuned DenseNet 201
CNN model for the input gesture image. It is observed from
the generated result that the dense block 3 and dense block
4 highlight the most important regions for which the gesture
pose is recognized more accurately. The recognition accuracy
using the features from each dense blocks is analyzed in next
subsection.
2) Quantitative analysis: The effectiveness of the proposed
technique is observed on test gesture samples of the bench-
mark dataset in terms of mean accuracy. The results of the
proposed method using both the CV test is shown in Fig. 4.
The performance of the HGR system using proposed method
is determined using four common measures such as accuracy
(A), precision (P), recall (R), and F1-score (F1) [13]. The
efﬁcacy of test gesture samples utilizing the features from each
dense block of the ﬁne-tuned DenseNet 201 is represented in
Fig. 4(a) and Fig. 4(c). Form the above ﬁgures it is observed
that the HGR performance using the features from dense block
3 and dense blcok 4 are superior than the ﬁrst two dense
blocks. This is because the ﬁrst two dense blocks preserve
low-level information with low variance, whereas the last two
dense blocks extract high-level semantic information with high
variance for an input gesture image. From this conclusion,
the proposed feature is developed using the concatenation
of last two dense blocks which is denoted as DenseFeat.
Furthermore, the dimension of the Densefeat is reduced using
the PCA technique to eliminate the redundant information in
TABLE II
RESULTS OF PRECISION (P), RECALL (R), AND F1-SCORE (F1) ON
BENCHMARKED DATASETS USING PROPOSED FEATURES
Performance measures (%)
MU dataset
NUS II dataset
SI test
SD test
SI test
SD test
P
89.31
99.28
96.46
99.68
R
88.06
98.16
95.14
99.04
F1
88.10
98.64
95.32
99.26
the DenseFeat. In this approach, the variance of DenseFeat
that exceeds 99.99% is considered a redundant feature. For
example in NUS II dataset using the SI CV test, the feature
dimension of DenseFeat is reduced from 3712 to 1792 using
the PCA technique with 99.99% variance. The performance
of DenseFeat and DenseFeat with PCA using SI CV test and
SD CV test is shown in Fig. 4(b) and Fig. 4(d) respectively.
The performance measures such as precision, recall, and F1-
score of the proposed features using both the CV test on
benchmarked datasets are presented in Table II.The table
shows the effectiveness of the proposed technique on above
performance measures on both the dataset.
The class-wise performance comparisons on MU and NUS
II datasets using SI CV test are shown in Fig. 5(a) and Fig. 5(b)
respectively. It is observed from the Fig. 5(a) that the proposed
technique can able to recognize the gesture poses such as ‘3’,
‘b’, ‘c’, ‘e’, ‘f’, ‘h’, ‘j’, ‘l’, ‘q’, and ‘r’ in 100%. However,
for the similar gesture poses like ‘0’-’o’, ‘2’-’v’, ‘6’-’w’, and
‘m’-’n’ the recognition performance is restricted. Similarly
for the NUS II complex background dataset the poses like
‘b’, ‘f’, and ‘j’ are most accurately recognized. However,
gesture pose ‘d’, ‘h’ ‘a’ are misclassiﬁed due to the similar in
gesture vocabulary. This implies that the representation of the
aforementioned gesture postures is very identical. The Fig. 5
demonstrates that even though the proposed HGR system
exhibit superior recognition accuracy in the majority classes,
the overall performance is constrained due to the inter-class
similarity between the gesture poses. As a result, reducing
inter-class similarity in gesture vocabulary is necessary for
successful hand gesture recognition.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:55:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3RVHµ¶
3RVHµR¶
3RVHµ¶
3RVHµY¶
3RVHµ¶
3RVHµZ¶
3RVHµP¶
3RVHµQ¶






















































D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O P Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y Z [
\
]
3HUIRUPDQFH
*HVWXUHSRVHV
0HDQDFFXUDF\6,&9
D















D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
3HUIRUPDQFH
*HVWXUHSRVHV
0HDQDFFXUDF\6,&9
3RVHµG¶
3RVHµD¶
3RVHµK¶
E
Fig. 5. Class-wise performance comparison of DenseFeat with PCA using SI CV test on both the datasets. (a) MU dataset, (b) NUS II dataset.
















6,WHVW
6'WHVW
6,WHVW
6'WHVW
08GDWDVHW
186,,GDWDVHW
5HFRJQLWLRQ
DFFXUDF\
$11
.11
690
Fig. 6. Performance of proposed technique using individual classiﬁer.
C. Classiﬁcation performance using individual classiﬁers
The proposed feature DenseFeat, after feature optimization,
is given into the classiﬁers ANN, KNN, and SVM to recognize
the hand gestures. For ANN, the training algorithm uses multi-
layer perception with a backpropagation algorithm. The ”Log-
sigmoid” activation function is considered for the both hidden
and output layers. KNN is a supervised machine learning
algorithm that recognizes a new data point among its K nearest
neighbors as belonging to the majority class. The Euclidean
distance parameter is employed in this study to determine the
nearest neighbors. Experimentally, the K value is varied from
1-10 and the highest recognition accuracy is obtained for the
K value as 5. A liner kernel-based multi-class SVM is used to
classify hand motions using ”one-against-all” (OAA) method
[19]. For the training data having M output classes, M binary
SVM classiﬁers are generated using the OAA technique. The
performance of the individual classiﬁer is shown in shown
in Fig. 6. The results shows that the recognition accuracy of
proposed feature using SVM classiﬁer is superior than ANN
and KNN.
1) Performance comparison of proposed feature with fea-
tures from other state-of-the-art CNNs: This subsection com-
pares the effectiveness of the proposed DenseFeat with the fu-
sion of features from the last two blocks of the state-of-the-art
CNNs. For VGG 16 network, the features are extracted from
the ‘conv4 3’ and ‘conv5 3’ layers, and the test performance
is obtained using the SVM classiﬁer. Similarly, for ResNet 18
and ResNet 50 CNN models, the features are obtained from
the last two residual blocks. The particular feature extraction
layers for both the ResNet models are presented in Table III.
For the proposed DenseFeat, the feature extraction layers
for last two dense blocks are ‘conv4 block48 concat’ and
‘conv5 block32 concat’. The extracted features from both
layers are concatenated and used to train the SVM model.
The performance is evaluated using the trained SVM on the
test gesture samples, which is shown in Table III. The result
indicates that the features from DenseNet 201, which is the
proposed DenseFeat provide superior performance on both the
benchmarked datasets.
2) Computational time: The average inference time re-
quired to predict a gesture pose using the proposed DenseFeat
with PCA, ExtriDeNet [22], and HyFiNet [13] are 0.81s, 1.30s,
and 6.4s respectively. This demonstrates that the proposed
method can able to recognize the gesture pose more accurately
with less time compared to earlier reported techniques.
D. Comparison with earlier techniques on bench-marked
datasets
Table IV shows the comparision of recognition accuracy of
the proposed technique versus state-of-the-art approaches on
both datasets. The result indicates that the proposed method
outperforms earlier reported methods, achieving a mean accu-
racy of 88.15 % and 95.45 % using the SI CV test on the MU
and NUS II datasets, respectively. Similarly for SD CV test,
the proposed technique achieves higher mean accuracy than
the previous methods. Furthermore, it can also be observed
from the tabulation result that as the SD CV test is a user-
TABLE III
COMPARISON RESULTS OF PROPOSED DENSEFEAT AGAINST THE FUSION
OF GLOBAL FEATURES FROM DIFFERENT BLOCKS OF STATE-OF-THE-ART
CNNS USING SI CV TEST
CNN models
Feature extraction layers
MU
dataset
NUS
II
dataset
Mean accu-
racy (%)
Mean accu-
racy (%)
VGG 16 [20]
conv4 3, and conv5 3
84.85
91.89
ResNet 18 [21]
res4b and res5b
84.06
93.26
ResNet 50 [21]
add 13, and add 16
85.77
93.68
DenseNet
201
[15]
conv4 block48 concat,
and
conv5 block32 concat
87.16
94.50
The bold letter values indicate the proposed DenseFeat results.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:55:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

TABLE IV
COMPARISON RESULTS OF PROPOSED METHOD WITH STATE-OF-THE-ART
TECHNIQUES ON BOTH THE STANDARD DATASETS
Dataset
SI test
SD test
Methods
Accuracy
Methods
Accuracy
MU
CNN [14]
73.86
HyFiNet [13]
87.13
HyFiNet [13]
77.44
GB-ZM [23]
97.09
FCNN [14]
84.02
GB-HU [23]
97.63
ExtriDeNet [22]
84.28
Fusion
[AlexNet,
VGG16] [7]
87.83
DenseFeat
+
PCA
98.77
DenseFeat
+
PCA
88.15
NUS II
ExtriDeNet [22]
61.49
ExtriDeNet [22]
98.75
Fusion
[AlexNet,
VGG16] [7]
92.65
HyFiNet [13]
97.78
DenseFeat
+
PCA
95.45
DenseFeat
+
PCA
99.35
biased CV approach, its performance is often superior to the SI
CV test. The proposed technique shows superior performance
in both the datasets due to the following reasons. (i) The
proposed features DenseFeat contains the combination of high-
level semantic information from the last two dense blocks
of the DenseNet 201 which may preserve better discriminate
information for the gesture pose. (ii) After removing the redun-
dant information from the DenseFeat using the PCA technique
the reduced feature represents distinguishable features for a
given input gesture pose.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, a novel feature known as DenseFeat is
proposed for accurate recognition of vision-based static hand
gestures. The proposed system does not require any pre-
processing operations such as illumination normalization, skin
colour based ﬁlter for hand segmentation, etc. The DenseFeat
focuses on the global features from the receptive ﬁelds of both
the dense blocks which acquires the discriminate information
for the input gesture pose. In addition, the redundant informa-
tion in the DenseFeat is eliminated using the PCA technique.
Various qualitative and quantitative analysis proves that the
proposed method provides superior performance compared to
other earlier reported methods on both the standard datasets
in terms of recognition accuracy and computational time. In
future work, some discriminate feature extraction modules can
be added to the present HGR system to reduce the similar
gesture class-speciﬁc behavior between the hand gestures.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Sarma and M. Bhuyan, “Methods, databases and recent advancement
of vision-based hand gesture recognition for hci systems: A review,” SN
Computer Science, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 1–40, 2021.
[2] L. Guo, Z. Lu, and L. Yao, “Human-machine interaction sensing tech-
nology based on hand gesture recognition: A review,” IEEE Transactions
on Human-Machine Systems, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 300–309, 2021.
[3] J. P. Wachs, M. K¨olsch, H. Stern, and Y. Edan, “Vision-based hand-
gesture applications,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 54, no. 2, pp.
60–71, 2011.
[4] J. P. Sahoo, S. Ari, and D. K. Ghosh, “Hand gesture recognition using
DWT and F-ratio based feature descriptor,” IET Image Processing,
vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 1780–1787, Oct. 2018.
[5] Y. S. Tan, K. M. Lim, and C. P. Lee, “Hand gesture recognition
via enhanced densely connected convolutional neural network,” Expert
Systems with Applications, vol. 175, p. 114797, 2021.
[6] J. P. Sahoo, S. P. Sahoo, S. Ari, and S. K. Patra, “RBI-2RCNN: Residual
block intensity feature using a two-stage residual convolutional neural
network for static hand gesture recognition,” Signal, Image and Video
Processing, vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 2019–2027, Feb. 2022.
[7] J. P. Sahoo, S. Ari, and S. K. Patra, “A user independent hand gesture
recognition system using deep CNN feature fusion and machine learning
technique,” in New Paradigms in Computational Modeling and Its
Applications.
Elsevier, 2021, pp. 189–207.
[8] S. Kundu and S. Ari, “P300 based character recognition using convolu-
tional neural network and support vector machine,” Biomedical Signal
Processing and Control, vol. 55, p. 101645, 2020.
[9] M. Awais, X. Long, B. Yin, S. F. Abbasi, S. Akbarzadeh, C. Lu,
X. Wang, L. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Dudink et al., “A hybrid DCNN-
SVM model for classifying neonatal sleep and wake states based on
facial expressions in video,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health
Informatics, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 1441–1449, 2021.
[10] L. Fang, N. Liang, W. Kang, Z. Wang, and D. D. Feng, “Real-time hand
posture recognition using hand geometric features and ﬁsher vector,”
Signal Processing: Image Communication, vol. 82, p. 115729, 2020.
[11] Z. Wang, “Gesture recognition by model matching of slope difference
distribution features,” Measurement, vol. 181, p. 109590, 2021.
[12] K. Sadeddine, F. Z. Chelali, R. Djeradi, A. Djeradi, and S. Benabder-
rahmane, “Recognition of user-dependent and independent static hand
gestures: Application to sign language,” Journal of Visual Communica-
tion and Image Representation, vol. 79, p. 103193, 2021.
[13] G. Bhaumik, M. Verma, M. C. Govil, and S. K. Vipparthi, “Hyﬁnet: Hy-
brid feature attention network for hand gesture recognition,” Multimedia
Tools and Applications, pp. 1–20, 2022.
[14] S. F. Chevtchenko, R. F. Vale, V. Macario, and F. R. Cordeiro, “A
convolutional neural network with feature fusion for real-time hand
posture recognition,” Applied Soft Computing, vol. 73, pp. 748–766,
2018.
[15] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger, “Densely
connected convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 4700–4708.
[16] A. Barczak, N. Reyes, M. Abastillas, A. Piccio, and T. Susnjak, “A new
2D static hand gesture colour image dataset for ASL gestures,” Research
Letters in the Information and Mathematical Sciences, vol. 15, pp. 12–
20, 2011.
[17] P. K. Pisharady, P. Vadakkepat, and A. P. Loh, “Attention based detec-
tion and recognition of hand postures against complex backgrounds,”
International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 101, no. 3, pp. 403–419,
Feb 2013.
[18] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and
D. Batra, “Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via
gradient-based localization,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision, 2017, pp. 618–626.
[19] V. Vapnik, The nature of statistical learning theory.
Springer science
& business media, 2013.
[20] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
[21] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2016, pp. 770–778.
[22] G. Bhaumik, M. Verma, M. C. Govil, and S. K. Vipparthi, “Extridenet:
an intensive feature extrication deep network for hand gesture recogni-
tion,” The Visual Computer, pp. 1–14, 2021.
[23] S. F. Chevtchenko, R. F. Vale, and V. Macario, “Multi-objective opti-
mization for hand posture recognition,” Expert Systems with Applica-
tions, vol. 92, pp. 170–181, 2018.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on April 02,2026 at 13:55:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

