Computer Science • 23(2) 2022
https://doi.org/10.7494/csci.2022.23.2.3745
Dom´ınguez Ram´on Emmanuel
D´ıaz Hern´andez Raquel
Altamirano Robles Leopoldo
HUMAN GESTURE RECOGNITION
USING HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS
AND SENSOR FUSION
Abstract
Considering the continued drive of human needs along with the constant im-
provement of technology, it is convenient to develop techniques that can en-
hance communication between computers and humans in the most intuitive
ways possible. The possibility of automatically recognizing human gestures us-
ing artificial vision (among other kinds of sensors) allows us to explore a whole
range of applications to control and interact with environments. Nowadays,
most approaches for gesture recognition using sensors agree in the use of vi-
sion, myography, and movement devices that are applied to robotic, medical,
and industrial applications. In the context of this work, we study the principles
of using both vision and body contact sensing applied to the automatic classi-
fication of a human gesture set. For this, two different approaches have been
evaluated: feed-forward neural networks, and hidden Markov models. These
models have been studied and implemented for recognizing up to eight differ-
ent human hand gestures that are commonly applied in collaborative robotics
tasks.
Keywords
gesture recognition, collaborative robotics, vision-based sensors, myography
sensors, sensor fusion
Citation
Computer Science 23(2) 2022: 227–245
Copyright
© 2022 Author(s). This is an open access publication, which can be used, distributed
and reproduced in any medium according to the Creative Commons CC-BY 4.0 License.
227

228
Dom´ınguez Ram´on Emmanuel, D´ıaz Hern´andez Raquel, Altamirano Robles Leopoldo
1. Introduction, motivation
Over the past years, human gesture-recognition research has been improved mainly
due to the emergence of new devices that are aimed at creating new intuitive meth-
ods of interaction between humans and computers through human actions that are
commonly performed by the hands and limbs and remapping them to understandable
commands for high-level applications (such as robotics systems) in multiple areas.
In this sense, the automatic gesture-recognition process has been defined in [14]
as a set of techniques that are aimed at representing and classifying different signals
of communication between human users and work stations with defined objectives. In
these processes, a user executes nonverbal commands by generally using his/her arms
and hands to send specific messages according to the environment and intention for
a high-level application. These result in the generation of human-machine interfaces.
Since the late 80s, users have mostly interacted by using only a keyboard and
mouse through graphic interfaces. However, multiple devices have emerged over the
last decade that have improved the methods for creating new and more intuitive
interfaces (which are known as natural user interface systems). This new research
topic aims at designing and implementing software systems efficiently and, above all,
intuitively; this allows us to take full advantage of the potential benefits that are
offered by computers and machines.
Nowadays, the most commonly used sensors for this purpose are based on com-
puter vision techniques, electromyography (EMG), electroencephalography (EEG),
and electrocardiogram (ECG) sensing, and movement and inertial sensors accord-
ing to [9, 15]. In combination with computational signal-processing algorithms and
new machine-learning approaches for pattern recognition, these techniques have many
applications (such as home and office controlling [12] and industry intelligent sys-
tems [15, 25]).
For this last field, the majority of the approaches are focused on
human-robot collaborative activities and robotic arm manipulation.
In this context, we are particularly interested in the study and development of
techniques for gesture recognition and their applicability for intuitive industrial and
medical telemetry systems using multiple sensors. Several authors have addressed this
issue [4,7,25]; they agree in regard to the use of wearable sensors and computational
algorithms that involve temporal information along with collected data from devices.
Wang et al. [25] reported high accuracy recognition rates for a set of up to six hand
gestures; however, the use of muscle sensors without any other support restrains the
quality of the recognition in some cases, misleads in similar gesture cases, and limits
the numbers of total groups during the classification stages.
The objectives of this paper are mainly two. First, we propose a set of human
hand and arm gestures that are capable of being incorporated into industrial robotics,
medical telemetry, and collaborative robotics (among other applications). Second, de-
veloping and implementing sensor-fusion techniques and machine-learning algorithms
in order to recognize up to eight different human gestures with high precision rates;

Human gesture recognition using hidden Markov models and sensor fusion
229
for this, we consider the use of two sensors: leap motion controller and Myo armband
devices.
The following sections of this paper are structured as follows: Section 2 describes
the most relevant approaches that have been proposed in the last years about au-
tomatic human gesture recognition. Subsection 2.4 briefly details some of the most
recent applications of human gesture recognition. In Section 3, we describe the pro-
posed approach for recognizing a whole set of gestures for robotic and collaboration
applications. Our experiments and the results of their effectiveness over the proposed
data sets are reported in Section 4. Finally, we discuss the potential applications and
the contributions of this paper in Section 5.
2. Related work
2.1. Human gesture recognition
The studies that were made by Athavale and Deshmuk in [3] affirmed that human
communication is 35% verbal-based and 65% non-verbal (and based on gestures). In
this work, we focus on developing recognition techniques for the latter group; these
can be divided as communicative (whose intention is to express emotions) and ma-
nipulative (which are aimed at expressing instructions and commands). In [16], Singh
described that direct manipulation refers to methods that are aimed at controlling
a specific variable through a user feedback interface in order to adjust the parameters
of the first one (for example, a visual pointer that is related to position and movement
in real time and remapped from the position and speed of a mouse or other input
device).
Nowadays, multiple works have been proposed with the objective of automati-
cally identifying manipulative gestures using sensors and machine-learning techniques.
According to [27], the most recent approaches that are aimed at recognizing human
gestures that are performed by the hands and limbs are supported by image-processing
devices as well as wearable sensors that are capable of collecting information from the
human body. The majority of these methods are composed of three main stages:
modeling, analysis, and recognition.
The modeling stage consists of proposing the gestures to be studied according to
the context in which they will be used. In this context, several researchers have studied
and applied a variety of gestures for specific tasks. In [22], Rautiainen proposed a set
of instructions that were based on human gestures in order to control multiple devices
in the home and office. Another example of gesture sets was proposed in [25], where
the authors studied the capabilities of EMG sensors that are applied to industrial
applications; their proposed collection was the six hand-gesture set that is depicted
in Figure 1. In [10], Nurettin provided a gesture vocabulary that was composed of
11 patterns to be applied to handle communication between humans and computers
in intuitive ways by using movement sensors.

230
Dom´ınguez Ram´on Emmanuel, D´ıaz Hern´andez Raquel, Altamirano Robles Leopoldo
Other applications that are aimed at controlling aerial vehicles with simple hand
commands were proposed in [17].
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
Figure 1. Human hand-over intentions for human-robot collaboration by [25]: a) to need;
b) to give; c) to stop; d) to continue; e) speed up; f) slow down
The analysis process focuses on the feature extraction for each of the considered
gestures that permits identifying them as unique in the following stages. For this
purpose, movement and spatial features were considered in [10,24] in order to charac-
terize gestures from a human’s arms. With the same objective, Jorgensen proposed a
computation stage of three-dimensional descriptors and fast point feature histograms
(FPFH) in [8] according to movements that are performed by a user to describe
eight different intentions by using depth cameras. In [24], a method for combining
information from a Kinect sensor and EMG devices applying weighted D-S evidence
theory processes from limbs and hands was proposed to identify two human gesture
sets. However, the high computational resources of these techniques restrained their
application in multiple real industry tasks.
Finally, the recognition stage is aimed at implementing computational algorithms
and machine-learning techniques that allow for the automatic identification of human
gestures by using the previous computed features. In this sense, several authors have
addressed this problem by applying a variety of computational resources. In [21],
Rautaray proposed the use of hidden Markov models (HMM) to recognize a set of
human gestures and developed methods for processing and classifying commands from
the hands that were targeted for home automation applications. Other approaches
have also used HMM for gesture recognition in [19,23]; more recently, Wang addressed
the recognition of six different hand gestures through myography wearable sensors
in [25] and obtained good accuracy recognition rates.
The complete gesture set that was proposed is depicted in Figure 1. In [6], the
authors used physical contact sensors to recognize hand gestures. In [11], the authors
used EMG and IMU sensors.
In this work, we retake the most relevant gestures that have been proposed in
order to develop techniques that are aimed at recognizing a greater number of human
commands by using a combination of both myography wearable and vision-based
sensors.

Human gesture recognition using hidden Markov models and sensor fusion
231
2.2. Sensors for human gesture recognition
In the context of automatic gesture recognition, a sensor is defined as an electronic
device that is able to converting an external physical signal into useful information to
be sent toward a computer-human interface for high-level application development.
In [5], the authors argued that two type of sensors have mainly been used: vision-
based, and EMG wearable devices.
Multiple types of vision-based sensors have been used for these purposes; e.g.,
color and stereoscopic cameras, Kinect devices, and leap motion controllers. On the
other hand, physical contact sensors offer different alternatives; some of the most
common examples of these over the past few years are Myo arm band, cyberglove, and
inertial-based sensors. Figure 2 shows some examples of commonly used body sensors
for human gesture-recognition tasks.
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
Figure 2. Vision and contact sensors: a) Myo arm band; b) inertial-based sensors;
c) cyberglove device; d) leap motion controller; e) Kinect; f) stereoscopic camera array
Vision devices offer certain advantages over EMG (and vice versa); for this reason,
it is best to merge the data that is collected from different sources through sensor-
fusion techniques in order to improve the effective recognition of a particular gesture
set. In this work, we propose the use of leap motion controller and Myo arm band
devices to create large datasets that serve to characterize each gesture as being unique.
In Figure 2, some sensors that are used for gesture recognition are shown.
2.3. Predictive models
A predictive model is a computational technique that is formed from feature-
extraction processes. This is used to predict trends and behavioral patterns and can be

232
Dom´ınguez Ram´on Emmanuel, D´ıaz Hern´andez Raquel, Altamirano Robles Leopoldo
applied to multiple unknown events. Predictive analysis is based on the identification
of relationships between variables in past events; it then applies these relationships
and predicts possible outcomes in future situations.
For human gesture-recognition topics, researchers have proposed methods that
use different computational predictive models that apply machine-learning strategies.
Wang [25] proposed a hidden Markov model implementation in order to recognize
up to six human gestures using only EMG arm band sensors.
The advantage of
this is its capability of integrating temporal information to the inference process and
classifying the recorded features during the tests for different hand gestures. Other
authors have implemented feed-forward neural network architectures because of their
knowledge-abstraction abilities and efficacy for regression tasks [4].
In [24], Sun et al. implemented Bayesian regression models in order to infer a set
of arm-made gestures to gain good precision rates per the analyzed groups when many
descriptors is used for each sample. Also, a finite state machine (FSM) consisting of
computational abstractions that described the behavior of a reactive system through
a specific number of states and a certain number of transition modelings was applied
in [18].
According to our research, we have determined that the best models that match
the purpose of automatically evaluating gestures that merge different sources of infor-
mation are hidden Markov models and artificial neural networks. These approaches
are detailed in the following sections.
2.3.1. Hidden Markov models
HMM is a technique that is widely used in signal processing. The essence of this tech-
nique is to construct a model that explains the occurrence of observations (defined as
symbols) and use this to identify future observation sequences. The basis of HMMs
and their applications were originally described in [20] and recently retaken for mul-
tiple tasks. For a hidden Markov model, there is a finite number of states; these is
always in one of these. At each time, it enters a new state based on a transition proba-
bility distribution that is dependent on the previous steps. After a transition is made,
an output symbol is generated based on a probability distribution that is dependent
on the current state. Formally, an HMM is defined by the states, the transition prob-
abilities among them, and the probabilities of the outputs given a state. For instance,
the Baum–Welch algorithm is available to compute these probabilities and solve the
problem of gesture recognition under this approach (according to [13]).
In this context, compute the probability P(O|λ) of the occurrence for observation
sequence O = O1, O2, ..., OT given that the λ model parameters can be solved by
applying the forward-backward algorithm.
Selecting the best state sequence I = i1, i2, ..., iT so that P(O, I|λ) is maxi-
mized can be addressed by the Viterbi algorithm. In addition to the λ learn model
parameters given O such that P(O|λ) is maximized, it is necessary the procedure
Baum–Welch.

Human gesture recognition using hidden Markov models and sensor fusion
233
For gesture recognition, we assume that there are M different human gestures and
N descriptors per sample. For the j−th feature (j = 1, ..., N), we learn one HMM
for each class as well as the corresponding λi, i = 1, ..., M parameters. Given one
observation sequence O, we compute P(O|λ) for each HMM by using the forward-
backward procedure. Human gesture classification can be solved by finding the class
i that has a maximum value of P(O|λi) (as shown in Equation 1):
gesture(O) = arg max Ai : i = 1, ..., M(P(O|λi))
(1)
We consider the set of these HMMs and the decision rule in Expression 1 to be
a classifier for feature j. These M gesture classes and N features form an M × N
matrix of HMMs. By HMMi, j, we denote the model of gesture i (the i-th row) and
feature j (the j-th column) and its corresponding parameters is λi,j. For the set of
HMMs, row i is related to the gesture of interest. For these implementation of the
HMM classifier, the following parameters are learned by the Baum–Welch algorithm:
1. prior probabilities of each state;
2. transition probabilities between states;
3. parameters of each state s, mean vector µs,m, covariance matrix Σs,m, and weight
ws,m of each mixture Gaussian component.
Both
the
Forward
and
Baum–Welch
algorithms
need
to
compute
P(Ot|st = s), the probability of observing Ot given that state s at time t. In practice,
log-likelihood log(P(Ot|st = s)) is used instead. Another consideration is that the
probability of the occurrence of observation sequence O1, O2, ..., OT tends to decrease
exponentially as T increases. However, this causes no problem because the probabil-
ity that is computed in each part of HMMi,j (i = 1, ..., M) decreases comparably for
feature set j.
2.3.2. Feed-forward neural networks
Artificial neural networks (ANN) are mathematical models that are constructed based
on the functioning of biological neural networks. From a computational point of view,
an ANN can be described as a set of cellular software pieces that are analogous to
neurons, whereby a flow of information is established through an interconnection
topology in the same way that a synapse works with biological cells. Some of the
most important features that are described in this work are listed as follows:
• learn through examples;
• adaptability;
• generalization capabilities;
• fault tolerant.
There is at least one learning algorithm that is associated with each type of
network. These consist of a systematic method for finding adequate values of the
weights. In general terms, these are based on defining an objective function implicitly
or explicitly (which represents the overall state of the network). From this, the initially

234
Dom´ınguez Ram´on Emmanuel, D´ıaz Hern´andez Raquel, Altamirano Robles Leopoldo
assigned weights evolve to values that bring this function to a minimum stable state
network. Therefore, learning is something that is characteristic of the type of network.
Here, the input vectors and corresponding target values are used to train the
ANN until it can approximate a function. The designed ANN consists of three layers:
an input layer, a tan-sigmoid hidden layer, and a linear output layer. For the second
and third layers, weight matrix W, bias vector b, and output vector a are considered.
Those weight matrices that are connected to inputs are called input weights, those
that come from the hidden layer outputs are called layer weights. A representation
of a whole neural network for this purpose is depicted in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Feed-forward artificial neural network for gesture recognition proposed in [2]
The BP algorithm determines how to adjust the weights to minimize the per-
formance by using the gradient of the performance function.
The Levenberg–
Marquardt algorithm is used for the training stage. At the end, the authors reported
a final accuracy value of 90.3% for the four EMG gestures during the test stage.
In this work, we take both proposals (feed-forward neural networks and hidden
Markov models) besides stages for data combination using the leap motion controller
and Myo arm band for the input and training of the predictive models in order to
increase the number of hand gesture groups as well as the accuracy rate values.
2.4. Data fusion
Data fusion from multiples sources is a compendium of multidisciplinary techniques
that are analogous to the cognitive process that humans perform in order to integrate
data from multiples sensors (senses) in order to make inferences about the outside
world – converging on a set of results (a reaction).
One of the main objectives of data fusion is to combine the information that is
obtained from different sources for making better decisions, reducing imprecision and
uncertainty, and increasing robustness.
2.4.1. Data fusion technique
D.L. Hall and S.A.H McMullen classified fusion techniques according to the math-
ematical logic that is used to incorporate uncertainty. Such uncertainty can be at-
tributed to observations or to any conclusions that are reached. The most important
ways to incorporate this are as follows:

Human gesture recognition using hidden Markov models and sensor fusion
235
Probabilistic
This is the mathematical logic model that has a more powerful theoretical basis
that is based on classical probability theory. By determining the functions of the dis-
tribution of the probabilities and conditional conditions (through empirical methods
or stochastically), these impose very restrictive hypotheses with little credibility in
complex problems. Classical probability and Bayes laws are probabilistic-based fusion
techniques.
Evidential
Evidential logic defines non-additive probabilities as a general notion for logical
assumptions and probabilities. The idea is to augment the standard propositional
logic by considering an operator that represents the state of the knowledge of all of
the sentences; it is argued that this is the best information that is available to an
analyst. Dempster-Shafer and generalized evidential theory are evidence-based fusion
techniques.
Diffuse
Diffuse logics was born in an article by L.A. Zadeh (published in 1965) that was
entitled Fuzzy Sets-. This concept appeared in response to bialent classical logic,
which allowed for a mathematical representation of concepts or an imprecise set.
Thus, it included itself in multi-valued logic and admitted various values such as
possible truths. Fuzzy sets and some hybrid AI operators are fusion techniques with
this logical basis.
3. Body gesture-recognition using sensor fusion
Sensors fusion is a technique that consists of combining information that comes from
multiple sensors in order to obtain a greater number of characteristics to describe
each gesture in this case. The use of vision and physical contact sensors eliminates
the disadvantages that each sensor presents when working independently. After a
revision of the multiple methods that were aimed at merging the data, we have opted
for feature level approaches in order to combine these two data sources.
The first step in the development of the proposed approach in this work is related
to the adaptation of a leap motion controller as well as a Myo armband device to
collect human gesture data. For all of our development and experiments, we have used
a robotic operating system (ROS) and software packages that are aimed at recording
and manipulating the data for these sensors.
3.1. Human gesture modeling
A gesture-recognition system has an initial analysis process that seeks to extract
and estimate the characteristics that are used in the classification or recognition. To
achieve this goal, the Myo armband and leap motion sensors will work together. The
modeling of the gestures depends on the context in which they will be used.

236
Dom´ınguez Ram´on Emmanuel, D´ıaz Hern´andez Raquel, Altamirano Robles Leopoldo
At first, the gesture set from [25] was taken to test the implemented predictive
models in this work. A set of gestures was proposed that were aimed at enlarging the
capabilities of our techniques in collaborative robotic environments. The proposed
human gesture set is shown in Figure 4.
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
h)
Figure 4. Proposed human gesture set: a) giving; b) needing; c) grabbing; d) holding;
e) setting free; f) cutting; g) drawing; h) turning off
After defining the gestures of interest, we collected a large amount of data for
each one through both the leap motion controller and Myo arm band in consideration
of these multiple points of view, postures, and human users.
3.2. Implementation of predictive models
As described in Section 2.3, we implemented two predictive models: feed-forward
neural networks (as shown in Section 2.4.1) and hidden Markov models (according to
the approach that was described in Section 2.3.1). These two methods were modified
to adapt each to the extracted features from our sensors.
3.2.1. ANN training
Training an artificial neural network is a process that modifies the value of the weights
that are associated with each neuron.
For our training process, we used the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm in
combination with BP. These techniques are based on optimization methods for feed-
forward neural architectures. We considered two different architectures for our tests
(described as follows):
1. FF-ANN consisting of 3 layers: 8 neurons for input layer, 10 hidden neurons
for middle layer, and output layer with 6 or 8 neurons according to considered
human gesture set;
2. FF-ANN consisting of 3 layers: 73 neurons for input layer, 10 hidden neurons,
followed by 6 or 8 output neurons.

Human gesture recognition using hidden Markov models and sensor fusion
237
The first one is considered when only the Myo arm band sensor is used to compute
a signal vector of eight values from the muscle lectures of a human arm. The second
architecture is considered when feature-level sensor fusion is carried out; then, we
computed a signal vector of 73 values using the leap motion controller in addition.
During the training and testing stages, the collected dataset was split by following
a ten-cross validation policy in all cases; in addition, two early-stopping conditions
were used: a total mean squared error of ϵ ≤0.001, or the training is stopped after
1000 epochs.
The implemented neural network has eight signals in the input layer, has 10
neurons for training in the hidden layer and has six neurons in the output layer. The
eight input signals correspond to the Myo armband readings, and the six neurons in
the output layer represent each of the gestures.
3.2.2. HMM training
Equation λ = {N, A, B, π} consists of four parameters; these elements will serve to
perform the training of the models.
As described in Section 2.3.1, the Baum–Welch algorithm is used to train mul-
tiple HMMs by using the extracted features from the sensors. In the same way as
described before, two kinds of models were implemented: using only the Myo arm
band, and including the leap motion controller as well.
According to what is described in Section 2.3.1, we implemented an HMM matrix
model for gesture recognition that was composed of six and eight individual HMMs
according to the considered gesture set. Each HMM had five hidden states, and each
state contained a 3-component mixture of Gaussian. Each λi,j of HMMi,j is learned,
and the probability of observation sequence O1, O2, ..., OT is computed. The gesture
with the maximum probability in the same column is then selected. Figure 5 shows
the proposed HMM matrix for gesture recognition considering two cases in the same
manner as before: 8-values for the vector training, and 73-values for the fusion case.
Figure 5. HMM matrix for gesture recognition [1]

238
Dom´ınguez Ram´on Emmanuel, D´ıaz Hern´andez Raquel, Altamirano Robles Leopoldo
4. Experiments and results
The following section describes all of the experiments that were performed for the
recognition of the body gestures.
For our tests, we collected two datasets that were related to two different gesture
types. This means that we had a total of 120, 000 samples for Dataset 1. At the
same way, Dataset 2 was composed of eight human gestures according to Figure 4
in Section 3.1; it was composed of 5000 samples per gesture by four different human
users, resulting in a total of 160, 000 samples.
For all of the tests, we named our human users H1, H2, H3, and H4 and defined
three training and evaluation cases for both the HMMs and ANNs as follows:
1. First Case:
• Training: H1; Testing: H2.
• Training: H1; Testing: H3.
• Training: H1; Testing: H4.
2. Second Case:
• Training: H2; Testing: H1 + H3 + H4.
3. Third Case:
• Training: H1 + H2 + H3 + H4; Testing: H1 + H2 + H3 + H4.
These combinations were planned in order to analyze the ability of the models to
represent each gesture independently from the human user and infer it from a different
one. All of the experiments where performed following a 10-cross validation strategy.
Other combinations were also considered, as we only presented the results for these
cases.
4.1. Human gesture recognition using EMG
Our first objective was to evaluate the performance of the implemented predictive
models by considering multiple training cases. During this test, we used Dataset 1
while only considering EMG data in order to study the recognition rate with few
features (one 8-feature vector per sample). Table 1 shows the precision and accuracy
results for the feed-forward neural networks.
The results shown in each column indicate the precision rate for each gesture while
considering three cases. The last row of the table shows the accuracy recognition rate
of each case. At the same way, these experiments were replicated using the HMM
architecture as described before. These results are detailed in Table 2.

Human gesture recognition using hidden Markov models and sensor fusion
239
Table 1
ANN recognition rate for Dataset 1 while considering EMG signals
Gesture
Case 1(a)
[%]
Case 1(b)
[%]
Case 1(c)
[%]
Case 2
[%]
Case 3
[%]
To Stop
29.8
6.1
60.4
27.6
70.4
To Continue
71.6
59.8
96.8
79.9
89.3
Slow down
91.4
83.5
81.3
79.1
87.3
Speed up
21.5
28.5
51.6
14.9
47.6
To Need
91.2
9.6
0.3
70.4
63.1
To Give
59.2
15.9
19.7
65.2
33.7
Accuracy
60.79
33.89
51.67
56.18
65.24
Table 2
HMMs recognition rate for Dataset 1 while considering EMG signals
Gesture
Case 1(a)
[%]
Case 1(b)
[%]
Case 1(c)
[%]
Case 2
[%]
Case 3
[%]
To Stop
84.9
7.2
28.3
87.8
85.4
To Continue
76.6
8.5
80.1
81.9
72.5
Slow down
27.5
1.7
81.2
75.0
65.4
Speed up
47.1
8.8
1.55
45.6
30.9
To Need
24.5
76.1
3.7
58.5
60.1
To Give
97.7
99.9
79.0
95.5
98.0
Accuracy
59.71
32.49
45.63
74.05
68.72
Table 3 summarizes the accuracy results of both predictive models.
Showing
these, the HMM models had higher accuracy rates at this stage for the three cases.
Table 3
Accuracy results for ANN and HMM
ANN
[%]
HMM
[%]
Case 1
48.78
45.94
Case 2
56.18
74.05
Case 3
65.24
68.72
According these experiments, the ANN’s accuracy resulted as follows: 48.78%
for Case 1, 56.18% for Case 2, and 65.24% for Case 3. On the other hand, the
HMM’s accuracy resulted in 45.94% for Case 1, 74.05% for Case 2, and 68.72% for
Case 3. Showing these, the HMMs could generalize the considered human gestures
in better way while using fewer features for the last two cases.

240
Dom´ınguez Ram´on Emmanuel, D´ıaz Hern´andez Raquel, Altamirano Robles Leopoldo
4.2. Sensor fusion gesture recognition
For this stage, we tested for the precision and accuracy rates while considering the full
feature vector for each gesture sample of Dataset 1. This included a 73-value vector
that included the information from the leap motion controller device.
During this test, we collected evidence of precision and accuracy improvements
when using both sensors being applied to Dataset 1 for all six human gesture cases.
4.3. Eight-human-gesture-dataset proposal
Considering the experiments that were carried out in the previous sections, it is
concluded that the HMM together with the sensor fusion significantly improves the
recognition rate for the six human gestures in Dataset 1 (see Table 4).
Table 4
HMM recognition rate for Dataset 1 while considering EMG and leap motion signals
Gesture
Case 1(a)
[%]
Case 1(b)
[%]
Case 1(c)
[%]
Case 2
[%]
Case 3
[%]
To Stop
85.1
31.1
33.1
89.1
99.3
To Continue
77.1
44.4
85.1
83.4
99.8
Slow down
51.1
62.5
92.2
76.6
99.9
Speed up
57.9
50.9
32.8
47.2
99.7
To Need
44.4
77.1
48.2
61.4
99.9
To Give
98.2
98.4
77.78
94.6
98.6
Accuracy
68.99
60.75
61.56
75.42
99.52
As described before, we proposed a new dataset (detailed in Section 3.1).
Dataset 2 is composed of eight different gestures. The results from testing the HMMs
over the new dataset are shown in Table 5.
Table 5
HMM recognition rate for Dataset 1 while considering EMG and leap motion signals
Gesture
Case 1(a)
[%]
Case 1(b)
[%]
Case 1(c)
[%]
Case 2
[%]
Case 3
[%]
Giving
68.1
29.6
43.8
78.6
91.8
To Need
72.5
34.5
39.9
43.8
93.0
Grabbing
68.4
54.1
59.0
78.3
99.5
Holding
73.5
63.5
63.6
98.0
96.4
Setting Free
58.4
64.1
3.7
98.7
97.9
Cutting
73.9
81.5
82.1
84.8
97.2
Drawing
63.7
53.6
57.4
90.9
96.8
Turn Off
61.4
67.2
66.1
63.9
87.8
Accuracy
67.49
55.69
59.50
79.63
95.05
According to these, we received accuracy rates for the different cases as follows:
60.89% for Case 1, 79.63% for Case 2, and 95.05% for Case 3.

Human gesture recognition using hidden Markov models and sensor fusion
241
For this reason, these techniques were applied to a different set of gestures. For
this stage of the experiments, the sampling was performed again for each gesture,
and the same amount of data was taken (this time with four test subjects). Three
different experiments were performed; these results are shown in Table 6.
Table 6
Recognition percentage with new set
Gesture
First experiment
[%]
Second experiment
[%]
Third experiment
[%]
Off
77.1
33.9
87.8
Cut
87.9
84.8
97.2
Break free
98.6
98.7
97.9
Need
95.7
43.8
93.0
Grab
81.2
68.3
99.5
Hold
98.4
98.0
96.4
Take
98.4
33.6
91.8
Draw
97.2
90.9
96.8
The first column show the results of the first experiment that consisted of dividing
the information that was obtained by each of the test subjects using 2500 information
points for the training and 2500 for the testing. For the second experiment, a set
of 5000 data points were used for the training, and 15,000 were used for the testing.
The last experiment consisted of using the combined information of all of the test
subjects, using 10,000 data points for the training and another 10,000 for the testing.
5. Conclusions and future work
In this paper, we have proposed feature-level fusion techniques that are meant to
recognize a set of human gestures using myography and vision-based sensors: the
leap motion controller and Myo arm band devices. Considering this combination, we
gathered features that corresponded to specific human gestures from the hands and
arms.
Since the main objective was to obtain the highest percentage of recognition for
each gesture, it was decided to fuse the information from both sensors to achieve
this purpose. It is important to mention that, when testing each sensor separately,
quite reliable results were obtained; however, the percentages increased as soon as the
information that was collected by the other device was incorporated. Immediately
after the data was merged, it was used to train the predictive models. Both artificial
neural networks (ANNs) and hidden Markov models (HHMs) were shown to be able to
recognize the gestures; however, it is worth mentioning that the HMMs were especially
busy for pattern and signal recognition and, therefore, showed superiority over the
neural networks in this case.
We collected a set of eight different gestures that can be applied to industrial and
medical robotic tasks in real scenarios. The combination of visual and myography

242
Dom´ınguez Ram´on Emmanuel, D´ıaz Hern´andez Raquel, Altamirano Robles Leopoldo
features to describe them has given good results, as the Myo arm band can estimate
the postures of the hands and arms while the vision sensor has no complete view
of arms. At the same time, the EMG lectures can be ambiguous for some similar
gestures, and the leap motion controller helped us distinguish the slight differences
between the hands when it was necessary.
For this research, we had a special interest in determining which kind of machine-
learning approach is best-fitted to represent human gestures when considering these
sensors. According to our tests, we determined that sequence-based techniques such
as hidden Markov models are capable of incorporating any previous data in order to
determine up to eight proposed gestures with high accuracy rates as compared to the
neural network methods.
Our evidence during the tests suggested that the used techniques are able to op-
erate in real-time application environments. As part of our immediate future work, we
propose the implementation of these techniques in real activities such as robotic arm
prototypes for industrial and medical tasks. Besides the ability of gesture recognition,
our sensors are able to get the spatial positions of the hands among other high-level
descriptors that are usable for developing robust applications.
In this sense, our
future objective in to incorporate the sensor lectures and data to the process of learn-
ing through a video sequence from human manipulation activities such those that
are shown in Figure 6. Figures 1a, 1b, and 1c show a sequence of activities that are
performed directly by the human hand; during movements that are performed with
both arms, any data on the posture, velocity, etc. is being captured. Figures 2a, 2b,
and 2c show the same routine; however, it is performed by a pair of robotic arms this
time. The information that is captured by the sensors can be useful for the learning
process of an automation task.
(1a)
(1b)
(1c)
(2a)
(2b)
(2c)
Figure 6. Human and robot activity sequence example – showing use of multiple tools
for industrial applications

Human gesture recognition using hidden Markov models and sensor fusion
243
According to novel approaches such as [26], new techniques are emerging for
improving machine-learning methods in robotic areas that are applied to industrial
tasks.
The developed work matches the objective of extracting information from
human operators and developing remapping processes to transfer the knowledge to
multiple robotic systems (as shown in Figure 6). Currently, we are in the process
of recording human and robotic sequences and developing techniques for carrying
out these inferring parameter policy techniques between humans and robots by using
sensors.
References
[1] Ahmad M., Lee S.W.: HMM-based human action recognition using multiview
image sequences. In:
18th International Conference on Pattern Recognition
(ICPR’06), vol. 1, pp. 263–266, IEEE, 2006.
[2] Ahsan M.R., Ibrahimy M.I., Khalifa O.O.: Electromygraphy (EMG) signal based
hand gesture recognition using artificial neural network (ANN). In: 2011 4th
International Conference on Mechatronics (ICOM), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2011.
[3] Athavale S., Deshmukh M.: Dynamic Hand Gesture Recognition for Human Com-
puter interaction; A Comparative Study, International Journal of Engineering
Research and General Science, vol. 2(2), pp. 38–55, 2014.
[4] Benalc´azar M.E., Anchundia C.E., Zea J.A., Zambrano P., Jaramillo A.G., Se-
gura M.: Real-Time Hand Gesture Recognition Based on Artificial Feed-Forward
Neural Networks and EMG. In: 2018 26th European Signal Processing Conference
(EUSIPCO), pp. 1492–1496, IEEE, 2018.
[5] Figueroa Y.S.: Reconocimiento anticipado de gestos, Instituto Nacional de As-
trof´ısica, Optica y Electrˆenica, 2013. http://inaoe.repositorioinstitucional.mx/
jspui/handle/1009/803.
[6] Georgi M., Amma C., Schultz T.: Recognizing Hand and Finger Gestures with
IMU based Motion and EMG based Muscle Activity Sensing. In: Biosignals,
pp. 99–108, 2015.
[7] Jin H., Chen Q., Chen Z., Hu Y., Zhang J.: Multi-LeapMotion sensor based
demonstration for robotic refine tabletop object manipulation task, CAAI Trans-
actions on Intelligence Technology, vol. 1(1), pp. 104–113, 2016.
[8] Jorgensen S.J.M.: Human detection, gesture recognition, and policy generation for
human-aware robots, Ph.D. thesis, The University of Texas at Austin, 2017.
[9] Junker H., Amft O., Lukowicz P., Tr¨oster G.:
Gesture spotting with body-
worn inertial sensors to detect user activities, Pattern Recognition, vol. 41(6),
pp. 2010–2024, 2008.
[10] Kılıboz N.C¸., G¨ud¨ukbay U.: A hand gesture recognition technique for human–
computer interaction, Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representa-
tion, vol. 28, pp. 97–104, 2015.

244
Dom´ınguez Ram´on Emmanuel, D´ıaz Hern´andez Raquel, Altamirano Robles Leopoldo
[11] Lake S., Bailey M., Grant A.: Method and apparatus for analyzing capacitive
EMG and IMU sensor signals for gesture control, US Patent: 09299248, 2016.
https://patentscope.wipo.int/search/en/detail.jsf?docId=US107210802.
[12] Lee K.C., Kweon J.H., Kim K.J., Choi J.W.: Method and apparatus for control-
ling a home device remotely in a home network system, US Patent: 09978260,
2018. https://patentscope.wipo.int/search/en/detail.jsf?docId=US105465928.
[13] Lv F., Nevatia R.: Recognition and segmentation of 3-d human action using
HMM and multi-class AdaBoost. In: European Conference on Computer Vision,
pp. 359–372, Springer, 2006.
[14] Mitra S., Acharya T.: Gesture recognition: A survey, IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews), vol. 37(3),
pp. 311–324, 2007.
[15] Molchanov P., Gupta S., Kim K., Pulli K.: Multi-sensor system for driver’s hand-
gesture recognition. In: 2015 11th IEEE International Conference and Workshops
on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG), vol. 1, pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2015.
[16] Nagar P., Sengar A., Sharma M.: Hand shape based gesture recognition in hard-
ware, Archives of Applied Science Research, vol. 5(3), pp. 261–269, 2013.
[17] Obaid M., Kistler F., Kasparaviˇci¯ut˙e G., Yanta¸c A.E., Fjeld M.: How would you
gesture navigate a drone?: a user-centered approach to control a drone. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 20th International Academic Mindtrek Conference, pp. 113–121,
ACM, 2016.
[18] Pink O., Becker J., Kammel S.: Automated driving on public roads: Experiences
in real traffic, it-Information Technology, vol. 57(4), pp. 223–230, 2015.
[19] Premaratne P., Yang S., Vial P., Ifthikar Z.: Centroid tracking based dynamic
hand gesture recognition using discrete hidden Markov models, Neurocomputing,
vol. 228, pp. 79–83, 2017.
[20] Rabiner L., Juang B.: An introduction to hidden Markov models, IEEE ASSP
Magazine, vol. 3(1), pp. 4–16, 1986.
[21] Rautaray S.S., Agrawal A.:
Vision based hand gesture recognition for hu-
man computer interaction: a survey, Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 43(1),
pp. 1–54, 2015.
[22] Rautiainen T.T., Hui P., Kaunisto R.H.S., Teikari I.A., Ollikainen J.P.J.: Gesture
control, US Patent: 09335825, 2016.
https://patentscope.wipo.int/search/en/
detail.jsf?docId=US73307542.
[23] Sinha K., Kumari R., Priya A., Paul P.: A Computer Vision-Based Gesture
Recognition Using Hidden Markov Model. In: Innovations in Soft Computing
and Information Technology, pp. 55–67, Springer, 2019.
[24] Sun Y., Li C., Li G., Jiang G., Jiang D., Liu H., Zheng Z., Shu W.: Gesture
recognition based on kinect and sEMG signal fusion, Mobile Networks and Ap-
plications, vol. 23(4), pp. 797–805, 2018.

Human gesture recognition using hidden Markov models and sensor fusion
245
[25] Wang W., Li R., Diekel Z.M., Chen Y., Zhang Z., Jia Y.: Controlling Object
Hand-Over in Human–Robot Collaboration Via Natural Wearable Sensing, IEEE
Transactions on Human-Machine Systems, vol. 49(1), pp. 59–71, 2018.
[26] Yu T., Finn C., Xie A., Dasari S., Zhang T., Abbeel P., Levine S.: One-shot imi-
tation from observing humans via domain-adaptive meta-learning, arXiv preprint
arXiv:180201557, 2018.
[27] Zabulis X., Baltzakis H., Argyros A.A.: Vision-Based Hand Gesture Recognition
for Human-Computer Interaction., The Universal Access Handbook, vol. 34, p. 30,
2009.
Affiliations
Dom´ınguez Ram´on Emmanuel
INAOE, Mexico; emmanuel.dominguez@inaoep.mx
D´ıaz Hern´andez Raquel
INAOE, Mexico
Altamirano Robles Leopoldo
INAOE, Mexico
Received: 04.04.2020
Revised: 22.12.2021
Accepted: 23.12.2021

