IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 71, 2022
2511111
NeuroGrasp: Multimodal Neural Network With
Euler Region Regression for Neuromorphic
Vision-Based Grasp Pose Estimation
Hu Cao
, Guang Chen
, Zhijun Li
, Fellow, IEEE, Yingbai Hu
, and Alois Knoll
, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Grasp pose estimation is a crucial procedure in
robotic manipulation. Most of the current robot grasp manipula-
tion systems are built on frame-based cameras like RGB-D cam-
eras. However, the traditional frame-based grasp pose estimation
methods have encountered challenges in scenarios such as low
dynamic range and low power consumption. In this work, a neu-
romorphic vision sensor—dynamic and active-pixel vision sensor
(DAVIS)—is introduced to the ﬁeld of robotic grasp. DAVIS is an
event-based bio-inspired vision sensor that records asynchronous
streams of local pixel-level light intensity changes, called events.
The strengths of DAVIS are it can provide high temporal
resolution, high dynamic range, low power consumption, and no
motion blur. We construct a neuromorphic vision-based robotic
grasp dataset with 154 moving objects, named NeuroGrasp,
which is the ﬁrst RGB-Event multimodality grasp dataset (to the
best of our knowledge). This dataset records both RGB frames
and the corresponding event streams, providing frame data with
rich color and texture information and event streams with high
temporal resolution and high dynamic range. Based on the
NeuroGrasp dataset, we further develop a multimodal neural net-
work with a speciﬁc Euler region regression sub-network (ERRN)
to perform grasp pose estimation. Combined with frame-based
and event-based vision, the proposed method achieves better
performance than the method that only takes RGB frames or
event streams as input on the NeuroGrasp dataset.
Index Terms—Euler region regression sub-network (ERRN),
grasp pose estimation, multimodal fusion, vision-based robotic
manipulation.
I. INTRODUCTION
G
RASP pose estimation plays an important role in robotic
manipulation. The emergence of advanced sensors, such
Manuscript received December 10, 2021; revised April 30, 2022; accepted
May 7, 2022. Date of publication June 2, 2022; date of current version
June 14, 2022. This work was supported in part by the Shanghai Municipal
Science and Technology Major Project through the Zhejiang Lab and the
Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain-Inspired Technology under
Grant 2018SHZDZX01; in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 82072021 and Grant 61906138; in part by the Shanghai
Rising Star Program under Grant 21QC1400900; and in part by the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research and Innovation
under the Speciﬁc Grant Agreement 945539 (Human Brain Project SGA3).
The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was Dr. Qing Wang.
(Corresponding author: Guang Chen.)
Hu Cao, Yingbai Hu, and Alois Knoll are with the Chair of Robotics, Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence and Real-Time Systems, Technische Universität München,
80333 Munich, Germany.
Guang Chen is with the Department of Computer Science and the School
of Automotive Studies, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China (e-mail:
guangchen@tongji.edu.cn).
Zhijun Li is with the Wearable Robotics and Autonomous Systems Labo-
ratory, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230022, China.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TIM.2022.3179469
as Microsoft Kinect, has enriched robot perception sys-
tems. In recent years, deep-learning-based methods have been
widely applied in robotic manipulation [1]–[5]. The suc-
cess of deep learning has driven approaches that leverage
large volumes of training data to perform complex tasks [2],
[6]. However, grasp datasets collected in the physical envi-
ronment are relatively scarce. Dexnet [7] has explored the
use of simulated data in grasp pose estimation to alleviate
this problem. Another challenge is maintaining a balance
between computational cost and the power available within
embedded robot systems. Current state-of-the-art robotic grasp
manipulation systems [8]–[10] usually leverage frame-driven
RGB-D cameras as the perception sensors. The traditional
frame-driven cameras capture the environmental information
by generating a series of discrete frames at a ﬁxed frequency,
providing rich color and texture information. However, frame-
based cameras suffer the challenges of high computing time
and storage consumption [11]. In this article, we build a
dynamic sensing pipeline using a neuromorphic vision sensor:
dynamic and active-pixel vision sensor (DAVIS-346). DAVIS
is a camera model which consists of a dynamic vision sensor
(DVS) (event-based sensor) synchronized with an RGB frame-
based sensor. DAVIS can synchronously record RGB data
and the corresponding event streams. Speciﬁcally, it only
transmits the local pixel-level changes caused by the change
in lighting intensity within a scene at the time they occur,
like a bio-inspired retina [12]. Concretely, the change in light
intensity is very effective for detecting moving objects. Fig. 1
presents a comparison between conventional images and the
corresponding event frames. Events are timestamped with the
precision of around a microsecond. A single event is deﬁned
as the tuple {t, x, y, p}, where t is the timestamp of the event,
x and y are the pixel coordinates of the event in 2-D space,
and p = ±1 is the polarity of the event which is the sign of
the brightness change. Compared with frame-based cameras,
the neuromorphic vision sensors have properties that are
complementary to RGB sensors, including very high temporal
resolution, high dynamic range (120 dB), and low power
consumption [13]. In our previous work [14], we introduced
an event-based grasping dataset (E-Grasping) for robotic grasp
pose estimation. However, the E-Grasping dataset only records
event streams and contains fewer grasp objects. In this work,
we use DAVIS as a perception sensor to construct a more
challenging dataset in the practical environment. This dataset
includes both RGB data and the corresponding event streams.
1557-9662 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Technische Universitaet Muenchen. Downloaded on August 02,2022 at 05:05:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2511111
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 71, 2022
Fig. 1.
Samples from NeuroGrasp dataset: a list of the selected RGB images
and the corresponding event frames.
Early works for robotic grasp mainly rely on template
matching to perform grasp pose estimation. In unstructured
environments where objects vary in shape and appearance,
template-matching algorithms cannot work effectively. Taking
2-D images instead of the 3-D model as input is more
convenient to predict grasp pose [1], [15]. Based on 2-D
images, many researchers have applied deep convolutional
neural networks in robotic grasp pose estimation and achieved
great success. In [1], a sliding window detection framework is
used for 2-D robotic grasp pose estimation. Speciﬁcally, image
sequences are fed into convolutional neural network to extract
features, and the highest output conﬁdence score of all grasp
candidates is chosen as ﬁnal prediction results. The drawback
of this method is the high computation cost. To speed up these
algorithms, end-to-end methods are developed [9], [16]–[18].
Concurrently, the authors take RGB or RGB-D images as input
to perform regression or classiﬁcation on grasp rectangles
and achieve signiﬁcant improvements on Cornell Grasping
Dataset [15]. Compared with the conventional frame-based
grasping, neuromorphic vision-based grasping is still in its
infancy.
For event-based robotic grasp pose estimation, it faces two
main problems: lack of data and effective algorithms. To cope
with these challenges, we collected a manually labeled mul-
timodality (RGB-Event) robotic grasping dataset, NeuroGrasp
dataset, and developed a multimodal neural network to explore
how to fuse the valuable feature context of RGB frames and
events to improve the performance. Speciﬁcally, with the use
of frequency-based encoding method [19], events generated
from DAVIS can be fed into convolutional neural networks
for subsequent grasp pose prediction. To take advantage of
DAVIS, we use convolutional ﬁlters to fuse the valuable
feature context of events and RGB images to improve the pre-
diction performance. Furthermore, an Euler region regression
sub-network (ERRN) is introduced to predict the orientation of
grasp objects by adding an imaginary and a real fraction to the
regression network. This strategy builds a closed mathematical
space to avoid singularities that may occur in single-angle esti-
mation [20]. The experimental results show that the proposed
method achieves better performance than the method that only
takes a single-mode signal as input.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows.
1) We collect an RGB-Event multimodality grasp dataset
named NeuroGrasp from a real-world experiment envi-
ronment, which will promote the research on neuromor-
phic vision sensors for robotic grasp pose estimation.
2) We develop a novel multimodal neural network to fuse
the valuable feature context of RGB images and events
to improve the performance. An ERRN is also intro-
duced for more accurate pose estimation.
3) Extensive experiments on the E-Grasping and Neuro-
Grasp datasets demonstrate that the proposed method
outperforms the method that only takes RGB frames or
event streams as input.
The main content of this article will cover seven parts.
Section II brieﬂy reviews related works about grasping
datasets, frame-based, and event-based grasp pose estimation
methods. Section III illustrates the setup of neuromorphic
robot manipulation system. Section IV describes the details
of our grasp pose estimation architecture. Section V presents
the dynamic grasping dataset, and Section VI gives the exper-
imental results and analysis on two dynamic grasping datasets,
E-Grasping and NeuroGrasp. Finally, we conclude our work
in Section VII.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Datasets
At present, the Cornell grasp dataset [15] and Dex-Net
dataset [7] are collected for analyzing grasp quality with par-
allel plate gripper (PPG). The Cornell Grasp dataset recorded
with an RGB-D camera consists of 885 images of 280 dif-
ferent objects. It is widely used by researchers and greatly
contributes to the robotic grasp research ﬁeld. The grasp
dataset demonstrates 8019 labeled grasp rectangles, including
several good grasp positions (5110) and bad grasp positions
(2909) for each view of an object. The point cloud data
and background image of each image are also provided. The
Dex-Net dataset is collected by UC Berkeley Automation
Lab [7]. Dex-Net provides synthetic point clouds and grasp
annotations based on 3-D objects and has been extended to
three versions of Dex-Net 1.0, Dex-Net 2.0, and Dex-Net 3.0.
Dex-Net 1.0 includes over 10000 different 3-D object models
and contains about 2.5 million grasp labels, and Dex-Net 2.0 is
a dataset of more than 6.7 million synthetic point clouds
and corresponding labels. Since Dex-Net 3.0 is built for
studying suction grasp, we do not describe it in detail in this
article. Moreover, a simulated dataset, named the Jacquard
Dataset [21], is created from CAD models through simulation.
In this dataset, more than 50k images of 11k objects are
collected and 1 million unique grasp rectangles are labeled.
However, these datasets are all focused on RGB-D data.
In our early work [14], we constructed an event stream-based
Authorized licensed use limited to: Technische Universitaet Muenchen. Downloaded on August 02,2022 at 05:05:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CAO et al.: NeuroGrasp: MULTIMODAL NEURAL NETWORK WITH EULER REGION REGRESSION
2511111
Fig. 2.
Comparison of output between standard frame-based camera and
neuromorphic vision sensor. (a) Frame-based camera captures images at a
ﬁxed frame rate. (b) Neuromorphic vision sensor captures emitted events
caused by moving objects asynchronously.
grasping dataset (E-Grasping) using an event-based dynamic
active vision sensor (DAVIS). Using an SMP ﬁlter to track led
markers, all objects are labeled automatically. The disadvan-
tage of this dataset is that it only records the event streams
for grasp objects. In this work, we build a more challenging
multimodality grasp dataset with more grasp objects.
B. Frame-Based Grasp Pose Estimation
Research on robotic grasp pose estimation has made impor-
tant advances over the past 20 years. Early works [1], [22]
trained grasp detector based on the sliding window, which is
very time-consuming. In [23] and [24], the authors reduced
inference time by learning their methods on a discrete set
of grasp candidates. However, these approaches ignore some
potential grasps. Other methods like [8], [25] used end-to-
end CNN-based algorithms to regress a single grasp for
an input image, but these approaches tend to estimate the
average grasp pose of objects. In [9], a grasp region proposal
network is incorporated for grasp pose estimation based on
Faster RCNN [26]. Furthermore, the authors of [16] proposed
a single-stage real-time grasp network with the orientation
anchor box mechanism, which achieves the outstanding per-
formance of both speed and accuracy. For object overlapping
scenes, an ROI-based method is developed in [27]. The exper-
imental results showed that their algorithm can effectively deal
with object overlapping scenes. Since the ground truths in
the grasp pose are not exhaustive, Chen et al. [28] introduced
a grasp path to generate mapped grasp for convolutional
multigrasp prediction which improved grasp accuracy in real-
world scenarios. In [29], the authors presented a highly
accurate and real-time grasp detection system with a rota-
tion ensemble module (REM). Some ideas of this network
design are inspired by YOLO9000 [30]. Another works [10],
[18], [31] deployed the neural network to generate grasps
with high-resolution images. Their model solves the problem
of pixel-wise robotic grasp pose estimation. Moreover, [17]
and [32] used the fusion method to perform grasp prediction
and achieved better performance. However, the above methods
usually take RGB or RGB-D images as input to perform
regression or classiﬁcation on grasp rectangles, and we will
explore the potential application of robotics by focusing on
neuromorphic vision sensors (DAVIS346).
C. Event-Based Grasp Pose Estimation
Recently, the development of event-based neuromorphic
vision technology provides an alternative sensing scheme for
many vision ﬁelds. Some attempts have been made in the ﬁeld
of object detection [19], [33]. For robotic grasp, a method
including perception, reasoning, and control is proposed to
solve the problem of picking and placing in mobile robots [34].
Based on embedded DVS, this method can pick up the object
and move it to its correct position. In [35], the authors pro-
posed a dynamic vision-based ﬁnger system for slip detection
and suppression. This ﬁngering system can detect object slips
better under illumination and vibration with a threshold algo-
rithm. For vision-based measurement applications, a dynamic-
vision-based approach for tactile sensing is introduced in [4].
Furthermore, the authors of [14] constructed an Event-based
Dataset and developed an event-based deep neural network to
predict grasp pose. However, compared with the conventional
frame-based vision, neuromorphic vision is still in its infancy
and generally offers a lower spatial resolution.
In this work, we introduce a multimodal neural network
to perform robotic grasp pose estimation, which combines
frame-based vision and event-based vision. We evaluate our
model on two dynamic robotic grasping datasets, E-Grasping
and NeuroGrasp. The experimental results demonstrate that
our model is capable of predicting exactly grasping rectangular
shapes.
III. NEUROMORPHIC GRASPING SYSTEM
A. Neuromorphic Vision Sensor
A neuromorphic vision sensor is a bio-inspired sensor,
which mimics the working principle of biological neurons
found in the visual cortex of mammalians [12]. The tradi-
tional frame-based vision cameras sense the environment by
producing a series of frames that sample the light intensity
at discrete time intervals. Neuromorphic vision sensors record
asynchronous event streams of the change in light intensity
of a given pixel. It allows the sensor to measure the per-pixel
changes caused by motion in a scene at the time of occurrence.
The difference between the two hardware systems is presented
in Fig. 2. A stream of sparse spatial–temporal events can
be represented by ei(xi, yi, ti, pi)i∈[1,N], which means that an
event is triggered at pixel location li = (xi, yi) when the
intensity change at a pixel occurs, i.e.,
L(li, ti) = L(li, ti) −L(li, ti −ti)
(1)
where L(·) is the brightness log function, and ti is the time
interval between the current event and the last event at the
same pixel. Speciﬁcally, the temporal contrast threshold ±T
(T > 0) is set for the intensity change to be reached
L(li, ti) = piT
(2)
where p ∈{+1, −1} is the polarity of event, which represents
the brightness change. p = +1 denotes the increase in
brightness intensity and −1 denotes the decrease. As an
emerging bio-inspired vision sensor, event-based neuromor-
phic vision sensors have several promising properties—low
energy consumption, low latency, high dynamic range, and
Authorized licensed use limited to: Technische Universitaet Muenchen. Downloaded on August 02,2022 at 05:05:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2511111
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 71, 2022
high temporal resolution. In this work, we will explore the
potential of neuromorphic vision sensors in the ﬁeld of robotic
grasp pose estimation.
B. System Setting
A neuromorphic vision sensor (DAVIS 346) collects the
event data through lighting intensity changing, so the object
needs to maintain movement within the ﬁeld of view. The
DAVIS 346 sensor is attached to the gripper of a robot
arm (hand–eye system) to simulate the real trajectory during
grasping. The PPG is widely mounted on the end of the robot
arm, and our grasping dataset is built following the Cornell
Grasping dataset [15]. At ﬁrst, we only consider ﬂat objects
as grasping objects. Moreover, most grasping objects can be
considered as ﬂat objects when the objects are placed on
the table with a proper direction. Compared with building
a 3-D grasping point cloud, this approach can reduce the
cost of storage and calculation. The grasping information of
ﬂat objects with a PPG can be demonstrated as a rectangle.
The width of rectangles presents the distance between gripper
plates, the height represents the range of compatible grasping,
and the center is placed at a particular point on the table,
which presents the grasping point. In addition, the rectangle
must be rotated to a particular angle to increase the capability
of grasp. This rectangle only provides the pose of PPG when
it contacts the table and tries to grasp the object.
C. Problem Deﬁnition
Given RGB images and event streams of different objects,
the grasp pose estimation algorithm needs to learn how to
ﬁnd a successfully grasp conﬁguration G for each object.
As described in [1], a 5-D grasp representation can be mapped
into the 7-D conﬁguration for robotic grasp execution on a
real scene. In this work, we take RGB images and events
generated by a neuromorphic vision sensor (DAVIS346) as
input to predict the 5-D grasp conﬁguration of a robot with a
parallel-plate gripper. As shown in Fig. 3, the grasp pose can
be formulated as follows:
G = {x, y, w, h, θ}T
(3)
where (x, y) is the central coordination of grasp rectangle, w
corresponds to the maximum distance between parallel plates,
h represents the height of parallel plates of the robot, and θ
is the angle of grasp rectangle with respect to the horizontal
axis.
IV. GRASP POSE ESTIMATION
In this section, we presented a multimodal neural network
architecture for grasp pose estimation. The overall framework
of this method is shown in Fig. 4. The method consists
of two branches, one branch extracts feature representations
from RGB images and another focuses on extracting feature
representations from event streams. The extracted features are
fused and fed into the subsequent network. Furthermore, three
task-speciﬁc subnetworks are added to perform grasp angle
estimation, object classiﬁcation, and bounding box regression
on the feature outputs, respectively. We will describe the
details of each component of grasping network.
Fig. 3.
5-D grasp conﬁguration. (a) Grasp conﬁguration is presented in
RGB images. (b) Grasp conﬁguration is presented in the corresponding event
frames.
A. Event Representation
Event streams generated by the neuromorphic vision sensor
are sparse and asynchronous, which cannot be processed by
the traditional computer vision method, such as CNN-based
algorithms [12]. Therefore, we use frequency-based encoding
method to pre-process event sequences to output matrix for
the CNN to extract deep feature.
Given that many more events would occur near an object’s
edges because edges of the moving object tend to be the edges
of illumination in the image, we use the event frequency as
the spike coding to strengthen the proﬁle of the object. At the
same time, noise caused by the sensor can be signiﬁcantly
ﬁltered out due to its low occurrence frequency at a particular
pixel within a given time interval [19]. Concretely, we count
the spike occurrence at each pixel (x, y), and based on
this, we calculate the spike coding value using the following
activation function:
σ(n) = 255 · 2 ·

1
1 + e−n −0.5

(4)
where n is the total number of occurred spikes (positive or
negative) at pixel (x, y) within given interval, and σ(n) is the
spike coding value of this pixel in the event sequences.
B. Multimodal Fusion
After
the
event
streams
are
processed
by
the
frequency-based encoding method, we use a 7 × 7 convolution
layer and a 3 × 3 max-pool layer to transfer the matrix of
event sequences into uniﬁed scale feature maps. As shown
in Fig. 4, the features from event-based and RGB-based
networks are fused to generate new feature maps. Since
neuromorphic vision sensors can capture dynamic features
of the object with high time resolution, combining event
streams and RGB data can enhance the spatial–temporal
context around grasp objects for improving the detection
performance. After that, we use ResNet as a feature extractor
to learn deep feature representation for grasp pose estimation.
The basic building block of ResNet is the residual block,
which is designed as the incorporation of a skip connection
with conventional CNN. Referring to [36], feature pyramid
network (FPN) is also used to get multiscale features with
a top-down pathway and lateral connections. We build a
pyramid from P3 to P7, where each pyramid level has
C = 256 channels. To obtain proper grasp pose, a two-vector
of grasp angle regression targets, a length K one-hot vector
Authorized licensed use limited to: Technische Universitaet Muenchen. Downloaded on August 02,2022 at 05:05:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CAO et al.: NeuroGrasp: MULTIMODAL NEURAL NETWORK WITH EULER REGION REGRESSION
2511111
Fig. 4.
Multimodal neural network architecture. The network includes two branches, one branch extracts feature representations from RGB images and
another focuses on extracting feature representations from event streams. The extracted features are fused and fed into the architecture formed by feature
pyramid network (FPN) on top of a feedforward ResNet to generate multiscale features. The outputs of the network are composed of the orientation angle,
object classiﬁcation, and the corresponding grasp poses.
of classiﬁcation targets, where K denotes the number of grasp
object classes, and a four-vector of box regression targets are
assigned to each anchor. An imaginary and a real fraction
is directly embedded into the network to estimate the grasp
angle. The grasping rectangle with adding a complex angle
arg(|r|eiθ) can be deﬁned as
tx =
xg −xa

wa
ty =
yg −ya

ha
tw = log
wg
wa

th = log
hg
ha

tθ = arg

|r|eiθ
= arctan2(tIm, tRe)
(5)
where x and y are the center coordinates of the grasping
rectangle. w and h denote the width and height, respectively.
θ is the orientation angle, which is represented by the form
of an imaginary parameter tIm and real fraction parameter tRe.
Variables xg, xa, and tx are for ground-truth box, anchor box,
and regression offsets between the anchor box and the ground-
truth box, respectively.
C. Euler Region Regression SubNet
The Euler region regression subnet is responsible for pre-
dicting the orientation angle of each grasping object. A fully
convolutional network (FCN) is applied to each feature pyra-
mid level. Speciﬁcally, FCN consists of four 3 × 3 convolution
layers with 256 ﬁlters, followed by a 3 × 3 convolution
layer with 2A ﬁlters, where A = 9. The orientation angle
can be computed from regression parameters tIm and tRe
using arctan2(tIm, tRe). As shown in Fig. 5, instead of directly
predicting the angle θ, we estimate the grasp pose of the
object by adding an imaginary and a real fraction to the Euler
region regression subnet. This strategy builds a closed math-
ematical space resulting in better generalization ability of the
model.
Fig. 5.
Grasp orientation angle regression. The oriented grasp pose is
predicted based on the complex angle represented by an imaginary and a
real fraction.
D. Class and Box SubNet
In parallel with the Euler region regression subnet, two
small FCNs are attached to each pyramid level for classiﬁca-
tion and bounding box regression, respectively. The structure
of the two subnets is identical to the Euler region regression
subnet except that the classiﬁcation subnet outputs K A predic-
tions and the box regression subnet produces 4A predictions.
In the classiﬁcation subnet, the probability of grasping objects
for each of the A anchors and K object classes is inferred
by ﬁnally passing sigmoid activations. Furthermore, the box
regression subnet produces four outputs to regress the offsets
between the anchor and the ground-truth box.
E. Loss Function
The multitask loss function of our grasp pose estimation
network is deﬁned as follows:
L = Lcls + Lreg + Leuler.
(6)
The loss function L consists of three parts, in which
Lcls represents the classiﬁcation loss, Lreg denotes the box
Authorized licensed use limited to: Technische Universitaet Muenchen. Downloaded on August 02,2022 at 05:05:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2511111
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 71, 2022
regression loss, and Leuler is the Euler region regression loss.
To improve the robustness of the network, we refer to the
design of optimization loss function Lcls and Lreg in [36].
Moreover, we extend the concepts of Lreg by an Euler region
regression part Leuler to get the use of closed complex number
space. The speciﬁc formulations are as follows:
Lcls = λ1
N
N

i=1
lcls(pi, ti)
Lreg = λ2
N
N

i=1
t′
i

j∈{x,y,w,h}
lreg
v′
i j, vi j

Leuler = λ3
N
N

i=1
t′
i

k∈{Im,Re}
lreg

θ′
ik, θik

(7)
where lcls is the focal loss, and lreg represents the smooth
L1 loss. In addition, N is the number of anchors, pi is
computed by the sigmoid function to represent the probability
distribution of various classes, and ti is the corresponding label
of the category. v′
i j and vi j denote the predicted offset vector
and the corresponding vector of ground-truth, respectively. For
the Euler region regression loss, we assume that the difference
between the predicted complex number and the ground truth is
always located on the unit circle with |r| = 1. Speciﬁcally, the
orientation angle θ is regressed by the form of an imaginary
Im and real fraction Re. λ1, λ2, and λ3 are hyper-parameters
for controlling the trade-off of different losses.
V. DYNAMIC ROBOTIC GRASPING DATASET
For robotic grasping pose estimation, the number of avail-
able grasping datasets is limited. The most famous com-
mon RGB-D grasping datasets are Cornell, Dexnet, and
Jacquard, which are used to compare the state-of-the-art
algorithms. To facilitate the application of event-based neu-
romorphic vision sensors in robotics, an automatically anno-
tated event-based grasping dataset (E-Grasping) is proposed in
our previous work [14]. However, compared with traditional
vision, event-based research is still in its infancy. In this
work, we present a manually labeled dynamic robotic grasping
dataset named NeuroGrasp. Compared with the E-Grasping
dataset proposed in [14], NeuroGrasp is the ﬁrst event-
based multimodality dataset for grasp pose estimation. The
dataset can be found in https://github.com/HuCaoFighting/
DVS-GraspingDataSet.
A. Dataset Recording
The dataset is collected using a neuromorphic vision sensor
(DAVIS346) with a 346 × 260-pixel resolution. DAVIS346,
also known as DVS or event-based camera, is a camera model
consisting of a DVS synchronized with an RGB frame-based
sensor. We use DAVIS346 to capture 154 grasp objects by
recording event-based and RGB frame-based streams sepa-
rately. The entire dataset is about 4620.42 s in length and
contains 14141.7 M events, making the dataset more diverse
and challenging.
Fig. 6. Grasp annotations: six grasping objects with different poses and views
are selected for display. The ﬁrst column is RGB images, and the remaining
columns are the labeled grasping objects’ event data with different poses.
B. Dataset Annotation
After manual ﬁltering of unusable data, the NeuroGrasp
dataset contains 8753 RGB images and corresponding event
streams of 154 different objects with various scales, ori-
entations, and locations. Each image is manually labeled
with multiple ground-truth grasp rectangles corresponding to
possible grasp conﬁgurations, as shown as Fig. 6. However, the
annotations are comprehensive and representative examples of
good grasp candidates and do not cover all potential grasps.
The rating score is affected by the denseness of each object’s
label. The standard ﬁle format in our benchmark is presented
in Table I. The dataset contains original binary data, raw
event data, RGB images, timestamp ﬁles for each frame of
RGB images, and labels. We also build a multiobject grasping
dataset for testing the generalization ability of our algorithm on
a more realistic and cluttered scene. In a multiobject grasping
dataset, a single image has three to ﬁve different objects with
various orientations or poses.
C. Dataset Analysis
In Table II, we summarize the public datasets and our
NeuroGrasp dataset. The most common grasping dataset is
Cornell, which is collected in a real-world environment. The
DexNet and Jacquard datasets are larger than Cornell’s. How-
ever, both DexNet and Jacquard datasets are generated by
simulation, so that large amounts of synthetic data and labels
can be produced. The E-Grasping dataset is our previous
work [14], which is labeled by tracking led markers. Since the
size of the E-Grasping dataset is small, we extend the version
of the event-based grasping dataset named NeuroGrasp, which
comprises 8753 images with the resolution of 346 × 260 pix-
els of 154 different novel real objects. In the NeuroGrasp
dataset, both RGB images and corresponding event streams
Authorized licensed use limited to: Technische Universitaet Muenchen. Downloaded on August 02,2022 at 05:05:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CAO et al.: NeuroGrasp: MULTIMODAL NEURAL NETWORK WITH EULER REGION REGRESSION
2511111
TABLE I
INTRODUCTION OF STANDARD FILE FORMAT IN OUR NEUROGRASP DATASET
TABLE II
SUMMARY OF THE PUBLIC GRASPING DATASETS
are recorded, and it is conducive to facilitating event-based
robotic grasping research.
VI. EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSIS
We present the experimental results of the proposed
multimodal neural network on the E-Grasping dataset [14] and
NeuroGrasp dataset.
A. Implementation Details
In our experiment setup, DAVIS 346 is attached to the end
of the robot arm to ensure relative motion between the grasping
object and the sensing sensor. The motion speed is controlled
under 10–50 mm/s. The experimental dataset is randomly
divided into training data and test data in a ratio of 8:2. In the
training period, we train the grasping network end to end for
30 epochs on two Nvidia GTX2080Ti GPUs with 22 GB
memory. We deﬁne the initial learning rate as 0.0005. The
weight decay and momentum are set to 0.0001 and 0.9,
respectively. The network is implemented using TensorFlow
with cudnn-7.5 and Cuda-10.0 packages.
B. Evaluation Metrics
In this work, the widely used rectangle metric is selected
to evaluate grasping pose estimation methods. In particular,
a prediction of grasp is regarded as valid when it satisﬁes the
following two conditions:
1) Angle difference: the difference in the grasp orientation
angle between the predicted grasp and the ground truth
is within 30◦.
2) Jaccard index: the intersection over union (IOU) of
ground truth and the predicted grasp is more than 25%,
as shown in the following equation:
Jgp, gt
 = |gp ∩gt|
gp ∪gt
(8)
TABLE III
ACCURACY (%) OF DIFFERENT METHODS ON THE E-GRASPING
DATASET PROPOSED IN [14]
where gp is the area of the predicted grasp rectangle, and
gt denotes the area of the ground truth. The intersection of
predicted grasp rectangle and ground-truth rectangle and the
union of predicted grasp rectangle and ground truth rectangle
are calculated by gp ∩gt and gp ∪gt, respectively.
C. Results
We explore the performance of the proposed multimodal
neural network in different input data and analyze the
experimental results of different grasping pose estimation
algorithms. The grasping performance are summarized in
Tables III and IV.
1) Experimental Results on E-Grasping Dataset: To facili-
tate comparison with [14], we train our model with the event
streams as an input on the E-Grasping dataset. Compared
with [14], the proposed grasp pose estimation method achieves
better performance with an accuracy of 98.9%. For different
lighting conditions, the proposed model can adapt well to the
changes in brightness. Furthermore, both the proposed model
and [14] have better performance in brighter conditions.
2) Experimental Results on NeuroGrasp Dataset: We com-
pare our model with the event-based method [14] and frame-
based method [9] on the NeuroGrasp dataset. Since DAVIS346
can simultaneously output two separate event streams and
RGB images, we develop a multimodal neural network to
fuse the valuable feature context of event streams and RGB
images. The experimental results demonstrate that the pro-
posed multimodal method has a better generalization ability
and achieves the best performance with an accuracy of 80.6%.
In Fig. 7, the grasping poses’ prediction results are pre-
sented. The ground-truth grasping rectangles are in the ﬁrst
row, the top-1 prediction results are visualized in the second
row, and the multigrasp results are depicted in the third row.
In the multigrasp case, our grasping pose estimation model
can predict grasping poses from the features of different
objects. The predicted results of these objects demonstrate
Authorized licensed use limited to: Technische Universitaet Muenchen. Downloaded on August 02,2022 at 05:05:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2511111
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 71, 2022
Fig. 7.
Prediction results of the proposed grasping network. The ﬁrst row is the ground truth. The second row is the top-1 grasp outputs for several objects.
The third row is the multigrasp results (best viewed in color).
Fig. 8.
Prediction results of multiple grasping objects. The ﬁrst row is the RGB images. The second row is the grasp outputs of the corresponding event
streams for several objects (best viewed in color).
TABLE IV
ACCURACY (%) OF DIFFERENT METHODS ON THE NEUROGRASP DATASET
that our grasping pose estimation method can predict grasp
conﬁguration effectively.
3) Single-Modal Versus Multimodal: In Table IV, grasp
prediction results with different input data are presented. For
each input data, we use ResNet-50 as backbone to explore
the impact of input modality on algorithm performance. Due
to the lack of rich appearance features such as color and
texture, the grasping pose estimation accuracy based on event
streams is lower than RGB frames. However, event streams can
provide valuable information with high temporal resolution
and high dynamic range, which are complementary to RGB
signals. In this work, we use convolutional neural network to
learn to fuse information from RGB frames and event streams.
By combining RGB frames and event streams, the prediction
accuracy is improved by about 4%. The proposed fusion
method outperforms the method that only takes RGB frames
or event streams as input. To validate the generalization ability
of our method, the model trained on the NeuroGrasp dataset
is used to test in multigrasp and multiobject environments.
The prediction results are presented in Figs. 7 and 8. The
model is trained on a single object dataset, but can still
predict the grasp pose of multiple objects and multigrasp
with various orientations. The results demonstrate the excellent
generalization ability and robustness of our method.
4) Effect of Dataset: We train our grasping pose estimation
algorithm on both the E-Grasping dataset and NeuroGrasp
dataset. Because the annotation method and quantity of label
data of two datasets are different, this will affect the predic-
tion accuracy. For the E-Grasping dataset, the same method
achieves a higher precision on the E-Grasping dataset than on
Authorized licensed use limited to: Technische Universitaet Muenchen. Downloaded on August 02,2022 at 05:05:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CAO et al.: NeuroGrasp: MULTIMODAL NEURAL NETWORK WITH EULER REGION REGRESSION
2511111
TABLE V
ACCURACY (%) OF DIFFERENT BACKBONES ON THE
NEUROGRASP DATASET
TABLE VI
NETWORK PARAMETERS’ COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT METHODS
the NeuroGrasp dataset as the size of the labeled ground-truth
box is larger and the number of grasping objects is fewer. The
NeuroGrasp dataset is more challenging.
5) Effect of Model Scale: In Table V, we discuss the effect
of network deepening on model performance. It can be seen
from Table V that the performance of the model combined
with ResNet-101 is better than that combined with ResNet-
50. Furthermore, the proposed fusion method improves the
prediction accuracy by about 4% on ResNet-50, but less on
ResNet-101. The reasons for this issue can be summarized as
follows.
1) Since the method used in this article is early fusion
(feature-level fusion at the early layers of the network),
the early fused features become more abstracted as the
network deepens, thus leading to less effective results.
2) The high detection accuracy achieved by the grasp-
ing model on ResNet-101 makes it difﬁcult to further
improve the performance. However, while the perfor-
mance of large model (ResNet-101) is higher, the model
complexity is also bigger. Therefore, the performance
improvement of multimodal fusion based on ResNet-50
is more promising for application.
6) Complexity Analysis: The comparison of the network
parameters between the method with single-modal input and
the proposed algorithm is listed in Table VI. With the addition
of 0.03 M parameters, the proposed fusion method improves
the prediction accuracy by about 4% and achieves the running
speed of 13 fps. Our fusion method has a good balance
between accuracy and speed.
D. Ablation Study
We provide an ablation study to discuss the impact of the
Euler region regression subnet (ERRN), objects in clutter, and
failure cases analysis. All the results are based on the ResNet-
50 backbone and trained on the NeuroGrasp dataset.
1) Effect of Euler Region Regression SubNet: To explore
the effect of the Euler region regression subnet (ERRN) for
grasp pose learning, we use ResNet-50 as the backbone to
train our model with and without ERRN on the NeuroGrasp
TABLE VII
IMPACT OF ERRN SUBNET ON THE PERFORMANCE (%) OF THE
NEUROGRASP DATASET
Fig. 9. Failed detection cases. The ﬁrst row is detection failure cases of single
grasping object, and the second row is failure cases of objects in clutter (best
viewed in color).
dataset. The performances are presented in Table VII. The
experimental results illustrate that the prediction accuracy can
be improved by about 3% in the best case (RGB input),
which demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed ERRN
subnetwork.
2) Objects in Clutter: For validating the generalization abil-
ity of our method, we use the ResNet-50-based model to test
on a more realistic and cluttered scene, where a single view has
two to ﬁve different objects with various orientations or poses.
The test results are shown in Fig. 8. In complex scenarios, the
proposed method can predict the grasp pose of multiple objects
simultaneously and have a good generalization ability.
3) Failure Cases Analysis: Some failed prediction cases are
selected to be shown in Fig. 9. It can be seen that the shadow
of the grasping object also produces events and affects the
prediction results. Some grasping objects with dense events
may cause the model to fail to recognize their contour shapes,
which leads to the failure of grasping prediction. At the same
time, objects that fail to generate enough events also cannot
be predicted very well.
E. Discussion
Compared with the traditional frame-based cameras, event-
based neuromorphic vision sensors have several advantages.
1) Energy-Friendly and Low Latency: Since event-based
neuromorphic vision sensors only process the triggered events
and do not need global exposure of the frame, they consume
less energy and have a lower latency. Such properties make it
more suitable for real-time applications.
2) High Temporal Resolution: For event-based neuromor-
phic vision sensors, changes can be captured and timestamped
to microsecond. This property meets the fast response require-
ments of the controller in robotics.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Technische Universitaet Muenchen. Downloaded on August 02,2022 at 05:05:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2511111
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 71, 2022
3) High Dynamic Range (HDR): The event-based neu-
romorphic vision sensors have an HDR (120 dB), which
outperforms the frame-based cameras (60 dB). Under a light-
changing scene, event-based sensors would perform better.
4) Capturing Grasping Object’s Edges: The event-based
neuromorphic vision sensor can ﬁlter out redundant informa-
tion and capture the grasping object’s shapes and edges. The
object’s shapes and edges are beneﬁcial for grasping and are
complementary to frame-based sensors.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this article, we construct a dynamic robotic grasping
dataset named NeuroGrasp. To the best of our knowledge,
it is the ﬁrst event-based multimodality robotic grasping
dataset. Based on this dataset, we introduce a multimodal deep
neural network for grasping pose estimation with combin-
ing frame-based vision and event-based vision. Furthermore,
an Euler region regression sub-network (ERRN) is proposed
to obtain more accurate orientation angle estimation. The
proposed multimodal method is evaluated on the E-Grasping
and NeuroGrasp datasets. The experimental results indicate
that the proposed method has a better performance and gener-
alization ability. We demonstrate that a neuromorphic sensor
will improve both the versatility and the precision of robotic
grasp pose estimation.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Lenz, H. Lee, and A. Saxena, “Deep learning for detecting robotic
grasps,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 34, nos. 4–5, pp. 705–724, 2015.
[2] D. Liu, X. Tao, L. Yuan, Y. Du, and M. Cong, “Robotic objects detection
and grasping in clutter based on cascaded deep convolutional neural
network,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–10, 2022.
[3] B. Cheng, W. Wu, D. Tao, S. Mei, T. Mao, and J. Cheng, “Random
cropping ensemble neural network for image classiﬁcation in a robotic
arm grasping system,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 69, no. 9,
pp. 6795–6806, Feb. 2020.
[4] F. B. Naeini et al., “A novel dynamic-vision-based approach for tactile
sensing applications,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 69, no. 5,
pp. 1881–1893, May 2020.
[5] P. Payeur, C. Pasca, A.-M. Cretu, and E. M. Petriu, “Intelligent haptic
sensor system for robotic manipulation,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1583–1592, Aug. 2005.
[6] G. Chen, K. Chen, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, and A. Knoll, “VCANet:
Vanishing-point-guided context-aware network for small road object
detection,” Automot. Innov., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 400–412, Nov. 2021.
[7] J. Mahler et al., “Dex-Net 2.0: Deep learning to plan robust grasps with
synthetic point clouds and analytic grasp metrics,” Proc. Robot., Sci.
Syst., Boston, MA, USA, 2017.
[8] S. Kumra and C. Kanan, “Robotic grasp detection using deep convo-
lutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS), Sep. 2017, pp. 769–776.
[9] F.-J. Chu, R. Xu, and P. A. Vela, “Real-world multiobject, multigrasp
detection,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 3355–3362,
Oct. 2018.
[10] H. Cao, G. Chen, Z. Li, J. Lin, and A. Knoll, “Residual squeeze-
and-excitation network with multiscale spatial pyramid module for fast
robotic grasping detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.
(ICRA), May 2021, pp. 13445–13451.
[11] G. Gallego et al., “Event-based vision: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 154–180, Jan. 2022.
[12] G. Chen, H. Cao, J. Conradt, H. Tang, F. Rohrbein, and A. Knoll, “Event-
based neuromorphic vision for autonomous driving: A paradigm shift for
bio-inspired visual sensing and perception,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag.,
vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 34–49, Jul. 2020.
[13] G. Chen et al., “Neuromorphic vision-based fall localization in event
streams with temporal-spatial attention weighted network,” IEEE Trans.
Cybern., early access, May 9, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2022.3164882.
[14] B. Li, H. Cao, Z. Qu, Y. Hu, Z. Wang, and Z. Liang, “Event-based
robotic grasping detection with neuromorphic vision sensor and event-
grasping dataset,” Frontiers Neurorobot., vol. 14, p. 51, Oct. 2020.
[15] Y. Jiang, S. Moseson, and A. Saxena, “Efﬁcient grasping from RGBD
images: Learning using a new rectangle representation,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., May 2011, pp. 3304–3311.
[16] H. Zhang, X. Zhou, X. Lan, J. Li, Z. Tian, and N. Zheng, “A real-time
robotic grasping approach with oriented anchor box,” IEEE Trans. Syst.,
Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 3014–3025, May 2021.
[17] U. Asif, J. Tang, and S. Harrer, “Densely supervised grasp detector
(DSGD),” in Proc. AAAI, 2018, pp. 8085–8093.
[18] H. Cao, G. Chen, Z. Li, J. Lin, and A. Knoll, “Lightweight convolutional
neural network with Gaussian-based grasping representation for robotic
grasping detection,” 2021, arXiv:2101.10226.
[19] G. Chen et al., “Multi-cue event information fusion for pedestrian
detection with neuromorphic vision sensors,” Frontiers Neurorobot.,
vol. 13, p. 10, Apr. 2019.
[20] M. Simon, K. Amende, A. Kraus, J. Honer, and H. M. Gross,
“Complexer-YOLO: Real-time 3D object detection and tracking on
semantic point clouds,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR) Workshops, Jun. 2018, pp. 1190–1199.
[21] A. Depierre, E. Dellandréa, and L. Chen, “Jacquard: A large scale dataset
for robotic grasp detection,” 2018, arXiv:1803.11469.
[22] A. Saxena, J. Driemeyer, and A. Y. Ng, “Robotic grasping of novel
objects using vision,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 157–173,
Feb. 2008.
[23] E. Johns, S. Leutenegger, and A. J. Davison, “Deep learning a grasp
function for grasping under gripper pose uncertainty,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), 2016, pp. 4461–4468.
[24] D. Morrison, P. Corke, and J. Leitner, “Learning robust, real-time, reac-
tive robotic grasping,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 39, nos. 2–3, pp. 183–201,
Mar. 2020.
[25] D. Guo, F. Sun, H. Liu, T. Kong, B. Fang, and N. Xi, “A hybrid deep
architecture for robotic grasp detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom. (ICRA), May 2017, pp. 1609–1614.
[26] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster R-CNN: Towards real-
time object detection with region proposal networks,” in Proc. 28th Int.
Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Cambridge, MA, USA, vol. 1, 2015,
pp. 91–99.
[27] H. Zhang, X. Lan, S. Bai, X. Zhou, Z. Tian, and N. Zheng,
“ROI-based robotic grasp detection for object overlapping scenes,” in
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Nov. 2019,
pp. 4768–4775.
[28] L. Chen, P. Huang, and Z. Meng, “Convolutional multigrasp detection
using grasp path for RGBD images,” Robot. Auto. Syst., vol. 113,
pp. 94–103, Mar. 2019.
[29] D. Park, Y. Seo and S. Y. Chun, “Rotation ensemble module for detecting
rotation-invariant features,” 2018, arXiv:1812.07762.
[30] J. Redmon and A. Farhadi, “YOLO9000: Better, faster, stronger,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
pp. 7263–7271.
[31] S. Wang, X. Jiang, J. Zhao, X. Wang, W. Zhou, and Y. Liu, “Efﬁcient
fully convolution neural network for generating pixel wise robotic
grasps with high resolution images,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Biomimetics (ROBIO), Dec. 2019, pp. 474–480.
[32] G. Wu, W. Chen, H. Cheng, W. Zuo, D. Zhang, and J. You, “Multiobject
grasping detection with hierarchical feature fusion,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 43884–43894, 2019.
[33] H. Cao, G. Chen, J. Xia, G. Zhuang, and A. Knoll, “Fusion-based feature
attention gate component for vehicle detection based on event camera,”
IEEE Sensors J., vol. 21, no. 21, pp. 24540–24548, Nov. 2021.
[34] F. Mirus, C. Axenie, T. C. Stewart, and J. Conradt, “Neuromorphic
sensorimotor adaptation for robotic mobile manipulation: From sensing
to behaviour,” Cognit. Syst. Res., vol. 50, pp. 52–66, Aug. 2018.
[35] R. Muthusamy, X. Huang, Y. Zweiri, L. Seneviratne, and D. Gan,
“Neuromorphic event-based slip detection and suppression in robotic
grasping and manipulation,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 153364–153384,
2020.
[36] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for
dense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2017, pp. 2999–3007.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Technische Universitaet Muenchen. Downloaded on August 02,2022 at 05:05:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CAO et al.: NeuroGrasp: MULTIMODAL NEURAL NETWORK WITH EULER REGION REGRESSION
2511111
Hu Cao received the M.Eng. degree in vehicle engi-
neering from Hunan University, Changsha, China,
in 2019. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
in computer science with the Informatics-6, with the
Chair of Robotics, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Real-
Time Systems, Technische Universität München,
Munich, Germany.
He is also a member of the Informatics 6—Chair
of Robotics, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Real-Time
Systems, Technische Universität München, Munich,
Germany. His research interests include computer
vision, neuromorphic engineering, robotics, and deep learning.
Guang Chen received the B.S. and M.Eng. degrees
in mechanical engineering from Hunan University,
Changsha, China, in 2008 and 2011, respectively,
and the Ph.D. degree from the Faculty of Informat-
ics, Technical University of Munich, Germany in
2016.
He is currently a Research Professor with Tongji
University, Shanghai, China, and a Senior Research
Associate (Guest) with the Technical University
of Munich, Munich, Germany. His research inter-
ests include computer vision, image processing and
machine learning, and bio-inspired vision with applications in robotics and
autonomous vehicle. He was a Research Scientist at fortiss GmbH, a research
institute of the Technical University of Munich, from 2012 to 2016, and a
Senior Researcher with the Chair of Robotics, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Real-
time Systems, Technical University of Munich, from 2016 to 2017.
Dr. Chen was a recipient of the Program of Tongji Hundred Talent Research
Professor 2018.
Zhijun Li (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
in mechatronics from Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China, in 2002.
From 2003 to 2005, he was a Post-Doctoral Fellow
with the Department of Mechanical Engineering
and Intelligent systems, The University of Electro-
Communications, Tokyo, Japan. From 2005 to 2006,
he was a Research Fellow with the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Uni-
versity of Singapore, Singapore, and with Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. Since 2017,
he has been a Professor with the Department of Automation, University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, where he has been the Vice
Dean of the School of Information Science and Technology since 2019. His
current research interests include wearable robotics, tele-operation systems,
nonlinear control, and neural network optimization.
Dr. Li has been the Co-Chairs of IEEE SMC Technical Committee on
Bio-mechatronics and Bio-robotics Systems (B2S) and IEEE RAS Technical
Committee on Neuro-Robotics Systems since 2016. He is serving as the
Editor-at-Large for Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems and an Associate
Editor for several IEEE TRANSACTIONS.
Yingbai Hu received the M.Sc. degree in control
engineering from the South China University of
Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 2017. He is cur-
rently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in computer science
with the Informatics 6-Chair of Robotics, Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Real-time Systems Technical Uni-
versity of Munich, Munich, Germany.
He is also a member of the Informatics 6-Chair of
Robotics, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Real-time Sys-
tems Technical University of Munich. His research
interests include neural network optimization and
control in robotics, robot learning, surgical robotics, and reinforcement
learning.
Alois
Knoll
(Senior
Member,
IEEE)
received
the
Diploma
(M.Sc.)
degree
in
electrical/communications
engineering
from
the University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany,
in 1985, and the Ph.D. degree (summa cum laude)
in computer science from the Technical University
of Berlin (TU Berlin), Berlin, Germany, in 1988.
He served as the Faculty for the Department of
Computer Science, TU Berlin, until 1993. He joined
the University of Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany,
as a Full Professor, and the Director of the research
group Technical Informatics until 2001. Since 2001, he has been a Professor
with the Department of Informatics, Technische Universität München (TUM),
Munich, Germany. He was also on the Board of Directors of the Central
Institute of Medical Technology, TUM (IMETUM). From 2004 to 2006,
he was the Executive Director of the Institute of Computer Science, TUM.
His research interests include cognitive, medical, and sensor-based robotics,
multiagent systems, data fusion, adaptive systems, multimedia information
retrieval, model-driven development of embedded systems with applications
to automotive software and electric transportation, and simulation systems
for robotics and trafﬁc.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Technische Universitaet Muenchen. Downloaded on August 02,2022 at 05:05:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

