Dynamic Hand Gesture Recognition 
Subash Chandra Bose Jaganathan1  
School of Computing Science and 
Engineering 
VIT Bhopal University 
Bhopal-Indore Highway, Kothrikalan, 
Sehore, Madhya Pradesh – 466114. 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2497-1621 
Krishna Basak4 
School of Computing Science and 
Engineering 
VIT Bhopal University 
Bhopal-Indore Highway, Kothrikalan, 
Sehore, Madhya Pradesh – 466114. 
i.krbasak@gmail.com
Kesavan R2 
School of Computing Science and 
Engineering 
VIT Bhopal University 
Bhopal-Indore Highway, Kothrikalan, 
Sehore, Madhya Pradesh – 466114. 
kesavanraman.official@gmail.com 
Shinjan Verma5 
School of Computing Science and 
Engineering 
VIT Bhopal University 
Bhopal-Indore Highway, Kothrikalan, 
Sehore, Madhya Pradesh – 466114. 
verma.shinjan3701@gmail.com
Thevaprakash P3 
School of Computing Science and 
Engineering 
VIT Bhopal University 
Bhopal-Indore Highway, Kothrikalan, 
Sehore, Madhya Pradesh – 466114. 
thevaprakashp@gmail.com 
Anisha Mital6 
School of Computing Science and 
Engineering 
VIT Bhopal University 
Bhopal-Indore Highway, Kothrikalan, 
Sehore, Madhya Pradesh – 466114. 
mital.anisha11@gmail.com  
Abstract— Gestures were most likely utilised by our 
ancestors to communicate. Armstrong once stated that he 
believes movements using the hands were the earliest form of 
complex human communication. The beginning stage of human 
computer Interactions is a gesture recognition system. Here, we 
have designed a Dynamic Hand Gesture Recognition (HGR) 
System using a Neural Network, which can recognize the gesture 
using the Computer or Laptop's Web Camera and do the 
corresponding tasks. The model has been divided into mainly 
three modules. Firstly, Module 1 is about building a CNN model 
which we use to predict the gestures. Our second module is 
about predicting the gesture through live video feed. The final 
module is about assigning a specified task for a particular 
predicted gesture. For the predicted gesture, we use PyAutoGUI 
module to control devices like mouse and keyboard. Finally, the 
system is made to do some desired tasks in response to the 
gestures and obtains 99.84% of accuracy. 
Keywords— Hand gestures, CNN, System Control, Hand 
gesture recognition, PyAutoGUI 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Gesture Recognition is an important and active field of 
Computer Vision. Gestures can be Static or Dynamic 
(Motion), but direct use of the hand can be a more attractive 
and natural way of conveying the meaning to the humans and 
computer. But it also depends on the speed of motion and 
latency. Gesture recognition has several uses in human-
computer interaction, sign language communication, video 
surveillance, 
dance/video 
annotations 
and 
forensic 
identification. This paper is motivated from the problem that 
is faced by deaf and mute people that is prevailing for a long 
period. It eliminates the direct use of hands in public places 
especially during a pandemic situation like this. So, building 
and designing a system which can detect the gestures and can 
be widely used for delivering the information or controlling 
the devices. The introduction to the techniques that we use in 
this paper are as follows. We will use a database of images 
that represent the gestures and make a Convolutional Neural 
Network model, then train the model to classify the images 
based on the gestures from the database. The next step is to 
use the trained model to predict the gestures from real time 
live video feed. Finally, we assign some tasks to perform 
based on the predicted gestures. There are many applications 
where hand gestures can be used for interaction such as video 
games. These hand gestures can also be used by handicapped 
people to interact with the systems. Classical interaction tools 
like keyboard, mouse, touchscreen, etc. may limit the way we 
use the system. 
The purpose of this research is to apply transfer learning 
to develop several CNN models that can detect diverse real-
time hand motions. Gestures can interpret the same 
functionality without physically interacting with the 
interfacing devices. The problem lies in understanding these 
gestures, as for different people, the same gesture may look 
different for performing the same task. This problem may be 
solved by the use of Deep Learning approaches. Convolution 
neural networks (CNN's) are proving to be the ultimate tool to 
process such recognition systems. High computing power is 
required in order to process gestures with higher accuracy and 
efficiency. HGR systems are used for interfacing between 
computers and humans. The objective of this paper is to 
develop a model for recognition of hand gestures with 
reasonable accuracy and also to make the system to perform 
specific tasks based on the predicted gestures. The detailed 
summary introduces us to the basic knowledge about HGR. It 
also throws light on the importance of this recognition system 
and the motivation behind the work. The techniques that were 
used are also explained along with the problem statement. The 
final part of the introduction contains the main objective of the 
work.. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
Hand gestures and gesticulations are a common form of 
human communication. It is therefore natural for humans to 
use this form of communication to interact with machines as 
well. The main objective of this effort is to explore the utility 
of a neural network-based approach to the recognition of the 
hand gestures. For instance, touch-less human computer 
interfaces can improve comfort and safety in vehicles. 
Computer vision systems are useful tools in designing such 
interfaces. However, real-world systems for dynamic HGR 
present numerous open challenges. First, these systems 
receive continuous streams of unprocessed visual data, where 
gestures from known classes must be simultaneously detected 
and classified. Here we have taken a vision Based Model for 
gesture recognition as the vision based model deals with 
Video capturing, image processing and pattern recognition. 
The main objective of this effort is to explore the utility of a 
neural network-based approach to the recognition of the hand 
978-1-6654-9056-6/22/$31.00 @2022 IEEE
2022 IEEE 2nd International Symposium on Sustainable Energy, Signal Processing and Cyber Security (iSSSC) | 978-1-6654-9056-6/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/iSSSC56467.2022.10051259
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 10:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

 
 
gestures. Here we can compare with the other previous works 
related to HGR. It can also motivate us to understand the 
various advantages and disadvantages respected with their 
various techniques. In this literature review, we can discuss 
various methods for capturing hand gestures, such as using 
physical gloves [2], or simply using a camera to capture hand 
motions and map some of the shortcuts for opening 
applications [1], as well as some other methods that are likely 
more colour-oriented, such as wearing colored gloves to 
identify the hand but this document includes four stages for 
recognising hand motions [3]. The enhanced Adaboost 
approach is used to identify hands. It is followed by the hand 
tracking and segmentation operation. At last scale-space 
features detection is applied to find palm-like and finger-like 
structures [4]. The coloured video is taken as input and 
converted into binary [5]. Threshold segmentation is done to 
the RGB video to convert it to binary video. Expansion and 
corrosion are done as a part of pre-processing. Contour 
extraction is done in order to locate the hand. A VGG-Net 
network is used to classify the contour region as hand or face. 
Then finally the gesture is recognised [5]. There are several 
additional ways for recording hand gestures [6], where they 
employ the Microsoft Kinect to capture the human hand, 
which offers us with a virtual 3D Skeleton model of the 
human body, which includes the fingertip. This is how its 
interpret its gesture, let us see the purpose of the gesture 
recognition, basically here [6] the gesture trajectory is 
obtained by the Microsoft Kinect skeleton tracker, it stored in 
the sequence of the X, Y, Z coordinates to the hand tip of the 
person, it enabling the algorithm to compare the gestures that 
is observed independently from the relative point to the 
person from the sensor [6]. And some other researchers had 
done with the HGR by using sEMG Signals [7], The gesture 
acquisition is done by sEMG acquisition equipment to store 
and filter the electric signals that are generated by skin 
surface [7], Here they explain why they used the sEMG signal 
because it is a weak signal and it is easy to interface with the 
bioelectrical signal. This technology adopts 16-channel high 
spatio-temporal 
resolution 
sampling 
technology, 
this 
equipment can also able to collect the upper limb signals, it 
accompanies the most of the research tasks that are based on 
the EMG Signals, And Here they designed a lightweight 
glove kind of wearable [8]. That glove can capture and send 
hand motions wirelessly and in real time. They adhered with 
the IMU sensors on the surface of the fabric in that glove to 
track the motion of the palm and the motion or the rotations 
of the hand joints of the fingers [8]. The hand positions and 
gestures are obtained from the leap motion that is recorded in 
the coordinate to the centre of the leap motion; they have 
done the coordinate transformation for embedding the leap 
motion control based interaction in the existing system. They 
did the transformation by using the affine transformation 
method [10]. For the data fusion they used the methods kuke 
Kalman filter. for combining the data from the leap motion 
and Myo sensors to create 3D simulation of the Hand motion, 
Kalman mapping also used to optimise the estimation of hand 
position and orientation they used the interpolation based 
resampling for the combining both the sensors and SLR. How 
they are detecting means by using the LMC-API it allows 
access to detect the hands or arms and also they have 
implemented the 21 features [11]. These three fingers have 
the Raw data returned by IMUs processed by the fusion 
algorithm and they have done several processing and 
extracting the hand gestures [8]. Sensors used for HGR 
include wearable sensors such as data gloves and external 
sensors such as video cameras. Hand position and movement 
can be accurately measured using data gloves [9]. But data 
gloves are very expensive. A detector is used as a switch to 
activate the classifier if a gesture gets detected. Its job is to 
distinguish between gesture and no gesture classes by running 
on a sequence of images. Two models C3D and ResNet are 
used as a classifier model [11]. 
Hand gestures and gesticulations are an ordinary form of 
human ideas. It is so natural for people to use this form of ideas 
to communicate with accompanying machines as well. This 
uses the webcam to discover salutes created for one consumer 
and act elementary operations therefore. From the Existing 
Research Papers, we raise that Human Computer Interaction 
has a more important field, One of the Major Fields of 
calculating apparition in the understanding of human gestures. 
Hand gestures hopeful a habit of trading news accompanying 
added crowd in a in essence scope, directing few bots to act 
sure tasks in surroundings, or interplay accompanying the 
calculation. In that we have two various fads of recognition 
like One is the Vision Based model but this depends on the 
Environment and another is sensor located accompanying 
wanted environment belongings like lights and unique 
Environment. In that we have two different modes of 
recognition like One is the Vision Based model but this 
depends on the Environment and another is sensor based with 
needed 
background 
things 
like lights 
and isolated 
Environment. These hardware ploys are mainly some sensors 
or some other somewhat Arduino manoeuvre accompanying 
some alternative of sensors contained in it. Thus, the 
interaction between human and calculating becomes less 
“unaffected” by way of the use of aforementioned devices. 
Also, these schemes are not inexpensive, aesthetic and smooth 
to claim. For these reasons, it becomes unsettled too low for 
people to approach and use bureaucracy with ease. Human 
Computer Interaction (HCI) electronics are briskly evolving 
the habit we communicate by accompanying calculating 
devices and conforming to the uniformly growing demands of 
new paradigms. One of ultimate beneficial forms concerning 
this is the integration of Human-to-Human Interaction 
gestures to further ideas and meaning plans. The big objective 
of transporting this Systematic Literature Review (SLR) 
searches out the focal point of the state-of-the-creativity in the 
circumstances of fantasy-located gesture acknowledgment 
accompanying distinguishing devote effort to something hand 
sign acknowledgment (HGR) methods and permissive 
technologies. After a painstaking orderly excerpt process, 100 
studies having to do with the four research questions were 
selected. While it cannot be of excellent use for skimming 
computer networks or article a paragraph document, it is 
beneficial in news performers and while learning documents 
or files. A plain nod could pause or play the picture or increase 
the capacity even while situated a great distance away from 
the calculating screen. One keeps a manuscript through an 
eBook or a performance even while bearing a luncheon. 
Existing orders for only numbers and few elementary gestures 
so we can’t invite to do battle for all, but likely expected 
change always we have second-hand these gestures to 
communicate accompanying the calculation. For example, 
appearance, your touch to increase the book, existent orders 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 10:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

 
 
for only numbers and few elementary gestures so we can’t 
invite to do battle for all - meaning likely expected change 
forever. We have used these gestures to communicate while 
calculating or they were utilising the fittings like Kinect or 
leap motion that cost about nearly 100 USD that is much 
costlier in our country and still energetic supplies are skilled 
but that form more explosion so we have created this plan. We 
have captured a fantasy Based Model for signal Recognition, 
Gesture acknowledgment is a numerical understanding of a 
human motion to a computer, the view-located approach 
handles the Video Capturing, countenance dispose of and 
pattern acknowledgment. For this we should use the CNN 
classifier to decide the shape of the help. In the dream-located 
approach they have prevented skin colour separation. The aim 
search out identify active help gestures accompanying 
asserting the extreme veracity and moment of truth captured 
to acknowledged gestures from the Beginning they were 
second hand the sensor located manoeuvres like Use of 
photoelectric fittings, but it was Complex to use cause the 
Physical fastening accompanying the model is necessary and 
more explosion were caused while evolution and they create 
the protection but it again have a concurrent Problems and 
Kinect find a resolution but it was more expensive so 
achieving for all it was more troublesome so we have papered 
to work the unchanging use in our calculating arrangements 
accompanying the use of desktop computer or calculating's 
webcam. We are making use of implementing a plan that 
identifies Gesture recommendation utilising webcam & 
performs the Specified Operation. This use may be fashioned 
to arrest the backdrop while the consumer runs added 
programs and uses. This is very useful for a hands-free 
approach.  In order to remove the disadvantage of 
bureaucracy, we can train the model accompanying images 
that contain few cry secrets. In other words, we can train the 
model accompanying concepts accompanying the culture. The 
training dataset concedes the possibility of a merger of 
concepts accompanying and outside culture. Further tweaks 
may be organised in the rule to increase the efficiency of the 
signal acknowledgment process. The rule may be upgraded 
for better understanding and acknowledgment of the gestures 
and more recent gestures can be incorporated for more 
functionalities. The program that controls display for 
accumulating and inspecting gestures in addition to running 
the program may be enhanced considerably, such as providing 
an interactive GUI alternatively utilising terminal commands. 
By this habit we can build a robust model that acts less 
computations. So, at last we have papered to work the 
unchanging service in our calculating arrangements with the 
use of a desktop computer or calculating's webcam. 
III. SYSTEM ANALYSIS 
Introduction to our HGR system consist of Convolutional 
Neural Network to predict the gesture and it was created using 
the Keras, which is interface of Tensor flow to detecting the 
gesture and control the operating system according to the 
assigned task. Existing methods are for only numbers and 
some basic gestures so we can’t do it for all, meaning tends to 
be changed. We have always used these gestures to interact 
with the computer. For example, showing your palm to 
increase the volume, existing methods for only numbers and 
some basic gestures so we can’t do it for all. We have used 
these gestures to interact with the computer or they were using 
hardware like Kinect or leap motion which costs around 100 
USD which is much costlier in our country and also electrical 
equipment is there but that makes more noise so we have come 
up with this idea. We can segment our proposed work in three 
units/modules – 6 CNN Model Generation. Here, we will use 
a database of images and make a CNN model, train it to 
classify the images and any other same kind of image. User 
Feed Taking: Now, as we have made the CNN model, we will 
use this model to predict the gesture from real time live video 
feed. Doing the Task: As the prediction goes on, the system 
will do the task assigned to each gesture when they are 
predicted as shown in the Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1 Process for HGR 
IV. SYSTEM DESIGN AND IMPLEMANTATION 
We will see the systematic design of the work along with the 
detailed implementation of various modules which are the 
building blocks of this paper. There are three modules in total 
and are explained below. 
A. Module 1 
Module 1 is about building a CNN model which we use to 
predict the gestures. For that we use Keras (interface for 
Tensor Flow) to build and train the model using a local 
database of images. This forms the basis of our work as 
shown in the Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2 Keras Model 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 10:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

 
 
B. Module 2 
Our second module is about predicting the gesture through 
live video feed as shown in the Figure 3. From that input 
taken at real time by web camera we predict the gestures by 
the users by using the trained model. We used OpenCV for 
the purpose of image and video processing. NumPy is used to 
make images as arrays for further computations and lastly 
TensorFlow keras to predict the gesture. The below image 
shows various steps of processing. It includes converting the 
image into grayscale followed by the Gaussian blur. Then we 
find the absolute difference between the background and the 
current frame which gives the output image. 
 
Figure 3 Gesture acquisition in the model 
C. Module 3  
This is the final module of the work shown in the Figure 4. 
This module is about assigning a specified task for a 
particular predicted gesture. We use PyAutoGUI for 
controlling devices like mouse and keyboard. Finally, the 
system is made to do some desired tasks in response to the 
gestures.
 
Figure 4 Live Working of the model 
V. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
Introduction Here we are going to analyse how our model was 
performing in the stream of HGR. Our model is giving the 
accuracy of 99.84% approximately. Here we are providing 
the chart that shows how our model was performing while 
training as shown in the Figure 5, Figure 6, Figure 7. 
  
Figure 5 Values of epoch and Training and Testing Accuracy 
 
Figure 6 Epoch vs Accuracy 
 
Figure 7 Epoch vs Loss 
Here we have included the graph, table and charts, our 
model has reached the accuracy as 0.9984999895095825 
that is approximately 99.84%. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 10:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

 
 
A. Results 
In order to eliminate the limitation of the system, we can train 
the model with images that contain some noise in the 
background. The training dataset should be a combination of 
images with and without background to make the model more 
robust. We can use this dynamic HGR system in industries 
like for fighter robot, aquatic robot, disease prediction using 
smart devices and irrigation systems etc., [20-23]. The table 
here shows some of the work related HGR problems and the 
comparisons between classification accuracy as shown in the 
Table 1 and Figure 8. 
 
TABLE 1: COMPARISONS OF CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY 
Authors 
Methods 
Accuracy 
% 
Kim et al., [12] 
Using micro-Doppler 
Signatures with CNN  
85.6 
Lin [13] 
Human HGR using a 
CNN 
95.96 
Molchanov [14] 
HGR With 3D CNN  
77.5 
Nagi [15] 
Max-pooling CNN for 
vision-based HGR 
96 
Zhang [16] 
Dynamic HGR based 
on short-term sampling 
NN 
95.73 
Kopuklu [17] 
Dynamic HGR based 
on short-term sampling 
NN  
94.04 
Lai [18] 
CNN+RNN Depth and 
Skeleton based 
Dynamic HGR 
85.46 
Ahlawat [19]
HGR Using CNN
90.12
Proposed 
HGR Using CNN 
99.84 
Figure 8 Comparisons of Classification Accuracy. 
 
VI. CONCLUSION 
The following part discusses the enhancements that can be 
made to the system in the future. HGR is inevitable in this 
modern age of communication. Here we propose some of the 
limitations that exist and a new way of overcoming those 
limitations. It is very difficult to build a system for hand 
gestures with higher efficiency. Because it involves a lot of 
computations. In many applications, hands only occupy about 
10% of the image, whereas the most of it contains 
background, human face, and human body. So, we need to 
perform image segmentation and background elimination in 
real time. This is a constraint of the system. Hand gestures 
are an intriguing interaction paradigm that may be used in a 
range of computer applications. Picking a right technology to 
extract raw hand data is crucial and is also difficult. There are 
several promising areas of future study in HGR. This survey 
has provided a comprehensive overview of HGR techniques. 
To conclude, we can eliminate the existing problem in the 
system by adding some images to the dataset that contain 
different backgrounds. Thereby a robust model is built with a 
reasonable accuracy and involving less computations. 
References  
[1]  
HGR for Human Computer Interaction Aashni Hariaa, 
Archanasri Subramaniana, Nivedhitha Asokkumara, Shristi 
Poddara Jyothi S Nayaka* 7th International Conference on 
Advances in Computing & Communications, ICACC-2017, 22-
24 August 2017, Cochin, India 
[2]  
Motion tracking glove for augmented reality and virtual reality 
Vu Trieu Minh, Nikita Katushin and John Pumwa from the 
journal 
Paladyn, 
Journal 
of 
Behavioral 
Robotics 
https://doi.org/10.1515/pjbr-2019-0012 
[3]  
An Application of Classifier Combination Methods in HGR 
Guan-Wei Wang,1 Chunxia Zhang,2 and Jian Zhuang1 Research 
Article | Open Access Volume 2012 |Article ID 346951 | 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/346951 
[4]  
Y. Fang, K. Wang, J. Cheng and H. Lu, "A Real-Time HGR 
Method," 2007 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia 
and Expo, 2007, pp. 995-998, doi: 10.1109/ICME.2007.4284820. 
[5]  
HGR with Skin Detection and Deep Learning Method Hanwen 
Huang1, Yanwen Chong2, Congchong Nie2 and Shaoming Pan2 
Published under licence by IOP Publishing Ltd Journal of 
Physics: Conf erence Series, Volume 1213, Issue 2 Citation 
Hanwen Huang et al 2019 J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 1213 022001 
[6]  
Liu, F., Zeng, W., Yuan, C. et al. Kinect-based HGR using 
trajectory information, hand motion dynamics and neural 
networks. 
Artif 
Intell 
Rev 
52, 
563–583 
(2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-019-09703-w 
[7]  
Ying Sun, Chao Xu, Gongfa Li, Wanfen Xu, Jianyi Kong, Du 
Jiang, Bo Tao, Disi Chen, Intelligent human computer interaction 
based on non-redundant EMG signal, Alexandria Engineering 
Journal, Volume 59, Issue 3, 2020, Pages 1149-1157, ISSN 1110-
0168,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aej.2020.01.015.  
[8]  
Nicholas Diliberti, Chao Peng, Christopher Kaufman, Yangzi 
Dong, and Jeffrey T. Hansberger. 2019. Real-Time Gesture 
Recognition Using 3D Sensory Data and a Light Convolutional 
Neural Network. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International 
Conference on Multimedia (MM '19). Association for Computing 
Machinery, 
New 
York, 
NY, 
USA, 
401–410. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3343031.3350958 
[9]  
Juan Pablo Wachs, Mathias Kölsch, Helman Stern, and Yael 
Edan. 2011. Vision-based hand-gesture applications. Commun. 
ACM 
54, 
2 
(February 
2011), 
60–71. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1897816.1897838 
[10]  
Bachmann, D.; Weichert, F.; Rinkenauer, G. Review of Three-
Dimensional Human-Computer Interaction with Focus on the 
Leap 
Motion 
Controller. 
Sensors 
2018, 
18, 
2194. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/s18072194 
[11]  
Köpüklü, Okan, et al. "Real-time hand gesture detection and 
classification using convolutional neural networks." 2019 14th 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 10:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

 
 
IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture 
Recognition (FG 2019). IEEE, 2019. 
 [12]  
Kim, Youngwook, and Brian Toomajian. "HGR using micro-
Doppler signatures with convolutional neural network." IEEE 
Access 4 (2016): 7125-7130. 
[13]  
Lin, Hsien-I., Ming-Hsiang Hsu, and Wei-Kai Chen. "Human 
HGR using a convolution neural network." 2014 IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Automation 
Science 
and 
Engineering (CASE). IEEE, 2014. 
[14] 
 Molchanov, Pavlo, et al. "HGR with 3D convolutional neural 
networks." Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer 
vision and pattern recognition workshops. 2015. 
[15]  
Nagi, Jawad, et al. "Max-pooling convolutional neural networks 
for vision-based HGR." 2011 IEEE international conference on 
signal and image processing applications (ICSIPA). IEEE, 2011. 
[16]  
Zhang, Wenjin, Jiacun Wang, and Fangping Lan. "Dynamic HGR 
based on short-term sampling neural networks." IEEE/CAA 
Journal of Automatica Sinica 8.1 (2020): 110-120. 
[17]  
Kopuklu, Okan, et al. "Real-time hand gesture detection and 
classification using convolutional neural networks." 2019 14th 
IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture 
Recognition (FG 2019). IEEE, 2019. 
[18] 
 Lai, Kenneth, and Svetlana N. Yanushkevich. "CNN+ RNN 
depth and skeleton based dynamic HGR." 2018 24th international 
conference on pattern recognition (ICPR). IEEE, 2018. 
[19]  
Ahlawat, Savita, et al. "HGR using convolutional neural 
network." International conference on innovative computing and 
communications. Springer, Singapore, 2019. 
[20]  
J. S. C. Bose, M. Mehrez, A. S. Badawy, W. Ghribi, H. Bangali 
and A. Basha, "Development and designing of fire fighter 
robotics using cyber security," 2017 2nd International 
Conference on Anti-Cyber Crimes (ICACC), 2017, pp. 118-122, 
doi: 10.1109/Anti-Cybercrime.2017.7905275. 
[21]  
A. Mubarakali, S. C. B. Jaganathan, N. Marina and A. D. Kumar, 
"Programmed Water Management System for Irrigation Using 
Internet of Things," 2019 International Conference on Intelligent 
Sustainable Systems (ICISS), 2019, pp. 203-207, doi: 
10.1109/ISS1.2019.8908110. 
[22]  
Bose, S.C., Mubarakali, A., Marina, N., Reshmi (2021). Design 
and Development of the Robot for Aquatic Debris Using a 
Smartphone. In: Raj, J.S., Iliyasu, A.M., Bestak, R., Baig, Z.A. 
(eds) Innovative Data Communication Technologies and 
Application. 
Lecture 
Notes 
on 
Data 
Engineering 
and 
Communications Technologies, vol 59. Springer, Singapore. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-9651-3_4. 
[23]  
Subash Chandra Bose Jaganathan. (2022). Machine Learning for 
Smartphone-Based Early Detection of Diabetic Disease in Pima 
Indians Diabetes Database. Journal of Algebraic Statistics, 13(1), 
780–796. 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 10:56:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

