VOL. 6, NO. 7, JULY 2022
6002304
Sensor applications
Vision-Based Continuous Sign Language Spotting Using Gaussian
Hidden Markov Model
Anjan Kumar Talukdar
and M. K. Bhuyan
Department of Electronics and Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati 781039, India
Manuscript received 9 May 2022; accepted 17 June 2022. Date of publication 21 June 2022; date of current version 1 July 2022.
Abstract—The presence of movement epenthesis (me) between two consecutive signs in a continuous sign language
makes sign language recognition (SLR) a challenging task. In this letter, we propose a vision-based continuous SL
spotting system, which separates the meaningful signs from the sign sequences by removing the me components from
H.264/AVC compressed videos. The work is based on a two-state hidden Markov model (HMM) with Gaussian emission
probability. The HMM is trained by the feature set extracted from the entire sign sequence video and ﬁnally, the hidden
state-sequence is decoded using the Viterbi algorithm. From the decoded state-sequence, the sign spotting is done.
The feature set comprises features extracted from the compressed domain as well as uncompressed domain analysis
of the sign video. The video database is composed of American SL videos collected from Boston University database.
From the experimental results, it is seen that the proposed system can spot the sign and me frames with a spotting rate
of about 83%.
Index Terms—Sensor applications, continuous sign language, hidden Markov model (HMM), movement epenthesis, sign spotting.
I. INTRODUCTION
Sign language is a visual language used by the deaf community. The
aim of the sign language recognition (SLR) system is to transcribe sign
language into text or speech so that it can be easily understood by the
hearing community [1]. In continuous SL, there can be many nonsign
movements (called movement epenthesis) between true signs which
connect the end location of the previous sign to the start location of
the next sign [2]. Fig. 1 shows the movement epenthesis (me) frames
between the end location of sign “GATE” and the start location of the
sign “WHERE” in a continuous sign video [2]. So, the sign spotting,
i.e., the process of segmenting out the signs from continuous utterance
sentences by removing the me components is a challenging task for
continuous SLR systems [3].
The difﬁculty in sign language spotting is that instances of signs vary
in both motion and appearance [4]. Hidden Markov model (HMM)
is useful for dealing with the time-varying nature of features [5], [6].
Mohandes et al. [6] proposed a signer-independent Arabic SLR system
where HMM was used to present the time-varying feature patterns.
Azar and Seyedarabi [5] presented work on a dynamic Persian SLR
system using HMM. Kumar et al. [7] proposed a multisensor fusion
framework for SLR using coupled HMM (CHMM) for recognition of
dynamic isolated sign gestures. In [1], Gao et al. proposed a signer-
independent continuous SLR system using the self-organizing feature
maps (SOFM) as different signer’s feature extractor for continuous
HMM. Yang et al. [8] proposed a continuous SLR using level building
based on HMM. Some works were also reported using dynamic
time warping (DTW) [9], [10] which is a widely used algorithm for
template-matching based approaches. Recently, deep learning (DL)-
based frameworks have been implemented for continuous SLR [11],
[12]. But both approaches are computationally expensive and require
huge databases.
Generally, for SLR, the ﬁrst and third problems of HMM, i.e.,
evaluation and ﬁtting [13] are given more emphasis. But in our work,
the second problem of the HMM, i.e., inference is extensively used.
The contributions of the letter are as follows:
Corresponding author: Anjan Kumar Talukdar (e-mail: anjan.nov@gmail.com)
Associate Editor: Francisco Falcone.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/LSENS.2022.3185181
Fig. 1.
Movement epenthesis (me) between “GATE” and “WHERE”
signs [2].
Fig. 2.
Proposed HMM-based framework for continuous sign lan-
guage spotting.
1) We propose a continuous sign language spotting framework
using a two-state HMM in a novel way.
2) A fusion of both compressed as well as spatial domain features
is used.
The rest of this letter is organized as follows. Section II describes the
proposed work, Section III describes the experimental results obtained,
and ﬁnally, Section IV concludes this letter.
II. PROPOSED GAUSSIAN HMM FOR CONTINUOUS
SIGN LANGUAGE SPOTTINGS
The proposed framework for continuous SL spotting using Gaussian
HMM is shown in Fig. 2. First, the input sign sequence is captured
with an RGB camera. Then the captured H.264/AVC video is decoded
to extract the frames along with the motion vectors (MVs) that are
inherent in the compressed video itself. After that, the face of the
signer is detected and removed. After removing the face, both the
signer’s hands are detected by using the skin color-based segmentation
technique. After that, a feature set composed of one temporal and three
spatial features is derived. This feature set is used to train the HMM
which is ﬁnally used for separating out the “sign” and “me” frames.
2475-1472 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 13:02:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

6002304
VOL. 6, NO. 7, JULY 2022
Fig. 3.
Graphical model of an HMM for sign language sequence.
Fig. 4.
(a) Two-state HMM. (b) State-transition probability matrix.
Fig. 5.
Training of HMMs using the Baum–Welch method [13].
A. Applying the HMM for Continuous Sign
Language Spotting
Let, each sign sequence be represented by a sequence of vectors of
observations O, deﬁned as
O = o1, o2, . . .. . .. . ...oT
(1)
where ot is the vector observed at time t.
It is assumed that the sequence of observed vectors corresponding to
each sign sequence is generated by a Markov model λ. The graphical
model of the Markov model is shown in Fig. 3.
Sign language spotting can be considered as a two-class problem,
i.e., classiﬁcation of a frame into “sign” or “me” frame. For that reason,
a two-state ergodic HMM with Gaussian observation probability is
considered as shown in Fig. 4(a) where, one state is “Sign” and another
one is “me.” The “Sign” state is represented by “1” and the “me” state
is represented by “0.” The state-transition probability matrix is shown
in Fig. 4(b).
After that, the model is trained by the feature set derived from the
signsequencevideousingtheBaum–Welchmethodtoadjustthemodel
parameters [13]. The training process for all the sign sequences is
shown in Fig. 5.
Once the training is done, the decoding of the hidden state-sequence
is done using the Viterbi algorithm [14]. It is a dynamic programming
algorithm for ﬁnding the most likely sequence of hidden-states called
the Viterbi path for the desired observed sequence from the trellis as
shown in Fig. 6.
Thus from the state sequence, the spotting of signs can be done.
The transition from state “0” to state “1” can be considered as the
“start” frame of the current sign and the transition from state “1” to
state “0” can be considered as the “end” frame of the sign as shown in
Fig. 7. The intermediate frames corresponding to the state sequence
“0000....0” can be considered as “nonsign” or “me” frames and the
frames corresponding to state sequence “11.....1” can be considered as
“sign” frames as shown in Fig. 7.
Fig. 6.
(a) Trellis diagram for the HMM. (b) Viterbi path for ﬁnding the
optimal state sequence.
Fig. 7.
HMM state-sequence decoding for continuous sign language
spotting.
Fig. 8.
Preprocessing output. (a) Input frame. (b) Face removed. (c)
Hand segmentation output.
B. Features Extraction
1) Preprocessing of the Video: For ﬁnding the features, the
following preprocessings of the video are done ﬁrst.
1) Face detection: The face of the signer is detected and removed
using a haar-cascade classiﬁer [15]. It is a famous object detec-
tion technique based on the Adaboost learning algorithm. The
result of the face detector is shown in Fig. 8(b).
2) Handsegmentation:Afterremovingtheface,handsegmentation
is done using the skin color-based segmentation technique. First,
the RGB image is converted into HSV color space. Then lower
and upper ranges of H, S, and V for skin color are chosen
for selecting lower and upper thresholds. Then using these
thresholds, hand segmentation is done. The output of the hand
segmentation technique is shown in Fig. 8(c). After that, dilation
operation is done to ﬁll up the holes created inside the hands due
to hand segmentation.
2) Features Extraction: The four building blocks of sign lan-
guage are: the hand shape, the hand position, the orientation, and the
movement of the hand [9], [16], [17]. The hand shape and the hand
position are generally considered for ﬁngerspelling recognition. Ori-
entation and movement of the hand (spatiotemporal) are also important
for sign language recognition. After preprocessing of the frames, these
four features are extracted which are composed of the pixel as well as
compressed domain features. The following four features are used as
follows:
1) Position of the hands: The positions of the left and right hands
are found by ﬁnding the positions of the centroids of both hands
w.r.t face as shown in Fig. 9. Let (xr, yr) and (x f , y f ) denote the
coordinates of the right hand and face, respectively. Then the
position of the right-hand w.r.t. the face is located by the polar
coordinate P = (d, θ) where
d =

x f −xr
2 +

y f −yr
2
θ = tan−1
y f −yr
x f −xr

(2)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 13:02:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

VOL. 6, NO. 7, JULY 2022
6002304
Fig. 9.
Finding positions of hands.
Fig. 10.
Finding orientation of hands. (a) Fitting ellipse. (b) Orientation
of the major axis of the ellipse for left hand.
Fig. 11.
Some of the cropped hand images for ﬁnding HOG features.
Fig. 12.
Finding movement of the hands. (a) Movement of the hands.
(b) Motion vector (MV) components for left and right hands.
2) Orientation of the hands: The orientation of a hand is found by
ﬁtting an ellipse into the hand and ﬁnding the orientation of the
major axis of the ellipse, as shown in Fig. 10.
3) Shape of the hands: For ﬁnding hand shapes, histograms of
oriented gradients (HOG) feature [18] is used. For ﬁnding HOG
features of the hands, ﬁrst the hand portion is cropped based
on palm centroid information from the whole frame by ﬁtting
bounding rectangle around it as shown in Fig. 11.
4) Movement of the hands: Movement of the hands is found by
ﬁnding the movement of the centroids of both hands. For doing
this, compressed-domain technique [19] is used. In compressed-
domain technique, motion vectors (MVs) which are already
inherent in the H.264/AVC compressed video itself are used
as shown in Fig. 2. After that, MV components (i.e., −→
mvx and
−→
mvy) corresponding to −→
mv of each of the centroid for left and
right hands are found out as shown in Fig. 12.
After ﬁnding all the abovementioned features, a feature set is formed
for each frame by combining all the four features obtained. We per-
formed Z-test [20] to see the relevance of different features used. In all
cases, p-values were found to be lower than 0.05, meaning that all four
features are signiﬁcant as proposed. The dimensionality of the feature
set obtained for a particular frame is 138 × 1 which is very high. So, we
calculated the covariance matrix to see the correlations among different
features, as shown in Fig. 13(a). From the matrix, it is observed that
most of the features are correlated. So, to remove the correlations
among them, the principal component analysis (PCA) technique [21]
is used. As shown in Fig. 13(b), the correlation matrix of the principal
components shows that PCA components are uncorrelated and the
feature dimension is reduced to 42×1 with 95% variance. Finally,
Fig. 13.
Heat map of the covariance matrix of (a) all the features and
(b) PCA components.
Fig. 14.
Intermediate results of the preprocessing steps of the sign
sequence “Adopt-Advice” performed by (a) Signer 1 (b) Signer 2.
TABLE 1.
Continuous Sign-Spotting Results for Signer 1
feature sets for all the frames of the video are combined to form the
complete feature set. This feature set of reduced dimensions is used to
train the HMM.
C. Initialization of the HMM
The observation probability bj(ot ) is estimated as a Gaussian
pdf [14] with mean vector μj and covariance matrix 
j in state j. The
initial state-transition probabilities considered are a1,1 = a0,0 = 0.8,
a1,0 = a0,1 = 0.2.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
For experimental results, the American sign language lexicon video
dataset (ASLLVD) [22] prepared at Boston University is used. The
dataset consists of thousands of ASL signs, each produced by 1–8
native signers captured from different angles. We use the dataset cap-
tured by camera1 (the front view) with VGA (640 × 480) resolution
recorded at 60 fps. The sets of sign sequences considered elicited to
illustrate different possible sentence structures in ASL. They aimed
basically for computer vision researches containing a ﬁxed vocabulary
with signs occurring in different contexts and word orders.
Some intermediate results of the preprocessing steps for continuous
ASL sign sequence “Adopt-Advice” performed by native Signer 1 and
Signer 2 are shown in Fig. 14(a) and (b), respectively.
Table 1 shows the decoded state-sequences for the sign sequences
“Adopt-Advice” and “Camping-Can” performed by Signer 1. As we
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 13:02:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

6002304
VOL. 6, NO. 7, JULY 2022
TABLE 2.
Continuous Sign Language Spotting Results
TABLE 3.
Spotting Rate of Continuous Sign Sequences
observe the state of each frame of a sign sequence video, the length of
the Viterbi path is equal to the number of frames in the video.
Quantitative evaluation of the proposed method is carried out by
correct spotting rate [4] which is calculated as
R = C
N × 100
(3)
where C is the number of correct spottings and N is the number of test
signs. The correct spotting cs, is deﬁned as [4]
cs =

True, if (S + E) < 10
False, otherwise
(4)
where S = |gs −ss| and E = |ge −se|. ss and se are the start and
end frame numbers of the spotted sign, respectively, and gs and ge are
the start and end frame numbers of the ground truth of the spotted sign,
respectively.
Table 2 shows the sign spotting results for four sign-sequence
videos articulated by Signer 1 and Signer 2. From the table, it is
observed that for sign-sequence “Camping-Can,” both the signs are
spotted correctly. But, in the case of sign-sequence “Adopt-Advice,”
sign “Adopt” is correctly spotted, but the sign “Advice” is not spotted
correctly. Altogether, we have considered six different sign-sequences
consisting of two signs in each sequence articulated by eight signers.
The average spotting rates for four such sign sequences are shown
in Table 3. The overall spotting rate is found to be about 83%,
which is better than the spotting rate without using PCA (78%). The
spotting rate is superior to the proposed method based on support
vector machine by Yang and Lee [3]. In [3], they proposed a sign
and ﬁngerspelling spotting method using hierarchical steps. First, a
two-layer conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) is applied to discriminate
candidate segments of signs and ﬁngerspellings. After detecting the
candidate segments, their hand shapes are veriﬁed using BoostMap
embeddings (BMEs) and support vector machine (SVM). Finally, the
motions of ﬁngerspellings were veriﬁed with the CRF. They used both
hand-motion and hand-location-based features. They achieved 78%
and 83% spotting rates for signs using SVM and BME, respectively.
Also, Jian et al. [23] proposed a transformer-based network called
sign-lookup for continuous SL spotting. Although their work achieved
a spotting rate of 96%, their system requires two types of input videos
viz., isolated sign videos (query) and continuous sign videos (target).
But our system does not require such query signs and can spot the
signs from the continuous sign sequence videos irrespective of the
signs present.
IV. CONCLUSION
Inthisletter,weuseHMMinanovelwayforcontinuousSLspotting.
A two-state HMM with Gaussian emission probability is trained with
the features extracted from the sign sequence video, followed by the
decoding of the state-sequence for spotting the sign components from
the sign sequence. The fusion of features obtained from both the pixel
as well as compressed domain analysis is done to exploit the beneﬁts
of individual domains. From the experimental results, it is seen that
the proposed method can spot the sign frames with an average spotting
rate of about 83%.
The work can be further extended for the spotting of sentences
containing more than two signs. Once the spotting is done, HMM
models for each sign can be used for the recognition of the signs. The
work has lots of scopes for further investigation.
REFERENCES
[1] W.Gao,G.Fang,D.Zhao,andY.Chen,“AChinesesignlanguagerecognitionsystem
based on SOFM/SRN/HMM,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 37, no. 12, pp. 2389–2402,
2004.
[2] R. Yang, S. Sarkar, and B. Loeding, “Handling movement epenthesis and hand
segmentation ambiguities in continuous sign language recognition using nested
dynamic programming,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 32, no. 3,
pp. 462–477, Mar. 2010.
[3] H.-D. Yang and S.-W. Lee, “Simultaneous spotting of signs and ﬁngerspellings
based on hierarchical conditional random ﬁelds and boostmap embeddings,” Pattern
Recognit., vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 2858–2870, 2010.
[4] H.-D. Yang, S. Sclaroff, and S.-W. Lee, “Sign language spotting with a threshold
model based on conditional random ﬁelds,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 1264–1277, Jul. 2009.
[5] S. G. Azar and H. Seyedarabi, “Trajectory-based recognition of dynamic persian sign
language using hidden Markov model,” Comput. Speech Lang., vol. 61, pp. 1–10,
2020.
[6] M. Mohandes, M. Deriche, U. Johar, and S. Ilyas, “A signer-independent arabic sign
language recognition system using face detection, geometric features, and a hidden
Markov model,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 422–433, 2012.
[7] P. Kumar, H. Gauba, P. P. Roy, and D. P. Dogra, “Coupled HMM-based multi-sensor
data fusion for sign language recognition,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 86, pp. 1–8,
2017.
[8] W. Yang, J. Tao, and Z. Ye, “Continuous sign language recognition using level
building based on fast hidden Markov model,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 78,
pp. 28–35, 2016.
[9] R. Elakkiya and K. Selvamani, “Enhanced dynamic programming approach for
subunit modelling to handle segmentation and recognition ambiguities in sign
language,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 117, pp. 246–255, 2018.
[10] J. Tang, H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, and H. Guo, “Structured dynamic time warping for con-
tinuous hand trajectory gesture recognition,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 80, pp. 21–31,
2018.
[11] K. L. Cheng, Z. Yang, Q. Chen, and Y.-W. Tai, “Fully convolutional networks for
continuous sign language recognition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020,
pp. 697–714.
[12] R. Elakkiya, P. Vijayakumar, and N. Kumar, “An optimized generative adversarial
network based continuous sign language classiﬁcation,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 182,
2021, Art. no. 115276.
[13] R. Dugad and U. B. Desai, “A tutorial on hidden Markov models,” Signal Process.
Artif. Neural Netw. Lab., Dept. Elect. Eng., Indian Inst. Technol., Bombay, India,
Tech. Rep., 1996.
[14] L. R. Rabiner, “A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in
speech recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 257–286, Feb. 1989.
[15] P. Viola and M. Jones, “Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade of simple
features,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., vol. 1,
2011, pp. 1–9.
[16] D. Kelly, J. McDonald, and C. Markham, “Recognizing spatiotemporal gestures and
movement epenthesis in sign language,” in Proc. IEEE 13th Int. Mach. Vis. Image
Process. Conf., 2009, pp. 145–150.
[17] G. A. Rao and P. Kishore, “Selﬁe video based continuous indian sign lan-
guage recognition system,” Ain Shams Eng. J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1929–1939,
2018.
[18] N. Dalal and B. Triggs, “Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection,”
in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., vol. 1, 2005,
pp. 886–893.
[19] A. K. Talukdar and M. K. Bhuyan, “Movement epenthesis detection in continuous
ﬁngerspelling from a coarsely sampled motion vector ﬁeld in H.264/AVC video,” in
Proc. IEEE Recent Adv. Intell. Comput. Syst., 2018, pp. 26–30.
[20] S. M. Pereira and G. Leslie, “Hypothesis testing,” Aust. Crit. Care, vol. 22, no. 4,
pp. 187–191, 2009.
[21] C.O.S.Sorzano,J.Vargas,andA.P.Montano,“Asurveyofdimensionalityreduction
techniques,” 2014, arXiv:1403.2877.
[22] V. Athitsos et al., “The american sign language lexicon video dataset,” in Proc.
IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops, 2008,
pp. 1–8.
[23] T. Jiang, N. C. Camgöz, and R. Bowden, “Looking for the signs: Identifying isolated
sign instances in continuous video footage,” in Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Conf. Autom.
Face Gesture Recognit., 2021, pp. 1–8.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 13:02:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

