Indian Sign Language Numeral Recognition 
Using Region of Interest Convolutional Neural 
Network 
Sajanraj T D 
Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering 
Vidya Academy of Science and Technology 
Thrissur - 680501, Kerala, India 
sajanrajtd.wordpress.com 
sajanraj.t.d@gmail.com 
Beena M V 
Assistant Professor   
Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering 
Vidya Academy of Science and Technology 
Thrissur - 680501, Kerala, India 
beena.m.v@vidyaacademy.ac.in 
 
 
Abstract: - Communication provide interaction among the 
people to exchange the feelings and ideas. The deaf community 
suffer a lot to interact with the community. Sign language is the 
way through which the people communicate with each other. In 
order to provide interaction with normal people there is a system 
which can convert the sign languages to the understandable 
form. The purpose of this work is to provide a real-time system 
which can convert Indian Sign Language (ISL) to the text. Most 
of the work based on handcrafted feature. In this we are 
introducing a deep learning approach which can classify the sign 
using the convolutional neural network. In the first phase we 
make a classifier model using the numeral signs using the Keras 
implementation of convolutional neural network using python. In 
phase 
two 
another 
real-time 
system 
which 
used 
skin 
segmentation to find the Region of Interest in the frame which 
shows the bounding box. The segmented region is feed to the 
classifier model to predict the sign. The system has attained an 
accuracy of 99.56% for the same subject and 97.26% in the low 
light condition. The classifier found to be improving with 
different background and the angle of the image captured .Our 
method focus on the RGB camera system. 
Keywords: - Deep learning, Convolutional neural network, 
Region of interest, Real-time system. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the world different languages are used among the people to 
provide communication, while talking about physically 
impaired people both deaf and dump community also use 
different sign languages. The different languages are 
American Sign Language, Chinese sign language, Indian sign 
language etc. In each case symbols are vary with the 
involvement of motion, single handed and double handed 
representations. The static symbols are used to represent 
letters and some cases dynamic symbols are used for the 
words like “hello”,”Hai”,etc. A real time system among these 
community will allows the communication barrier among 
them. Once it has been converted to using the Computer Vison 
approach then it can be converted to any language. There are 
many researches undergone by in this are to build an efficient 
and accurate system. The previous works done by the 
researchers using the hand crafted feature but having 
limitation and used special conditions.  
The most works are based on the pattern recognition, feature 
extraction based on HOG, SIFT, LBP, etc. But the system 
using a single feature is not sufficient in most of the cases and 
the Hybrid approach are introduced to solve this problem. But 
for a real time system we need faster methods to solve our 
problems. Now a days ours computers are improved with the 
speed of processing using parallel implementation. In most of 
the time our system utilize a single core for solving a problem. 
Using the GPU system the problems can be solved by parallel 
computing and the number of cores is higher than the CPU 
system. Using the Deep Learning approach we can model a 
self-learning system for our needs. Convolutional neural 
network is one of the trending deep learning system which is 
capable of solving any kind of computer vision problem. In 
our method we used a Region of interest -Convolutional 
neural network for the real time implementation. 
II. 
LITERATURE SURVEY 
Computer    Vison has become one of the   trending 
technology used in most of the AI based system such as 
Robots, Cars, Markets, etc. The system has more impact on 
image classification   problems and   object detection. The 
sign language system can be implanted using this method. 
There are many other methods used in the prior systems.  
 In literature [1] used a framework for ISL Recognition 
system. A glove based color Segmentation is used and the 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Inventive Communication and Computational Technologies (ICICCT 2018)
IEEE Xplore Compliant - Part Number: CFP18BAC-ART; ISBN:978-1-5386-1974-2
978-1-5386-1974-2/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
636

Recognition is done using PCA (Principal Component 
analysis).  The real-time data frames in every 20th frame is 
taken as input to be recognized. The sign with both 
overlapping and motion crated problems in this method. 
Fingertip algorithm along with PCA is used for recognition 
purpose. Recent research works have focused on static signs 
of ISL [2] from images or video sequences that have been 
recorded using data glove, colored glove under controlled 
conditions like single background and special hardware 
devices. The light and position has more importance in the 
system. The signer must be aware of the system to work on 
this conditions. 
There are different methods for preprocessing Otsu’s 
thresholding [3][4] skin color and motion based segmentation 
and background subtraction [5].The feature extraction part 
uses wavelet decomposition, Fourier descriptors, scale 
invariant feature transform. There are many classifiers used to 
classify sign which are K Nearest Neighbor (KNN) Hidden 
Markov Models (HMM), Multiclass Support Vector Machines 
(SVM)[6], Fuzzy systems, Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) 
etc. 
In another paper[7] implemented an edge detection method for 
hand gesture recognition .The frame features are extracted 
using edge detection and sorting features in the database. 
Apply template matching using the created database to predict 
the gesture. Here the template matching is based on the 
minimal distance. The system is capable of identifying the 
dynamic gestures as well as static symbols. A fuzzy [8] based 
method is introduced, the system extract the spatial features of 
signs using a fuzzy membership function. A suitable symbolic 
similarity measure is calculated and matched with the Nearest 
Neighbor classifier.  
Reheja [9] et.al introduced a gesture recognition system on 
Indian sign language using the Microsoft Kinect sensor 
device. They experimented on both RGB and Depth images 
from Kinect .The research is found to be increasing the 
accuracy of the system while using RGB-D images. The 
model extract HU-Moments which are angle, location and 
shape invariant moments and feed those features to the SVM 
classifier. Pranali Loke[10] et.al developed an android app 
based system for Indian sign language .The android system 
collect images and sent to the server .The server system 
forward these images to Matlab application where the feature 
extraction takes place using Sobel operator and the system has 
trained using Neural network .The system apply pattern 
recognition and classification on the images and create an 
output as text. 
Beena M.V.et.al [11] developed a system to recognize 
American Sign Language (ASL) from the depth images of 
Kinect sensor. The system has trained using 1000 images of 
each numeral signs. The algorithm extract features from the 
block processed images and trained using the Artificial Neural 
Network (ANN) and obtained an accuracy of 99.46% for the 
depth images. The system has been trained on GPU for the 
faster execution. As an extension to the work uses 
Convolutional Neural Network [2017-2] (CNN) with softmax 
classification for 33 static symbols of Kinect depth images. 
The implementation shows that while the number of classes 
increases the handcrafted feature are become insufficient for 
classification purpose. The CNN structure is capable of 
learning from the given training set and it will outperform the 
accuracy related to other traditional methods. 
III. 
PROPOSED SYSTEM 
Indian sign language is a complex system which include the 
involvement of two hands. The efficient way is to perform 
convolutional neural network on the image to increase the 
efficiency of classification and for real life application. The 
basic steps involving the proposed system is shown below. 
Steps: 
1. Input the image (video frame). 
2. Find the hand object. 
3. Extract the feature. 
4. Classification and prediction.   
 
 
 
 
Most of the object detection problems train the model 
using the image data set along with a bounding box mapping. 
The marking of bounding box for each image is costly. In 
addition with that we proposed a region of interest predictor 
using the skin segmentation. From the segmented bounded 
region we crop the image and feed to the classifier for 
prediction. 
A. Region of Interest Detection 
 
In the first part we input the video frame, apply 
CLACHE (Contrast Limited Adaptive Histogram Equalization) 
on the image to equalize the lightness in the image frame 
using LAB color system. In the next step apply blurring on the 
original image using Gaussian blurring. In order to obtain the 
skin we apply thresholding operation using the HSV color 
space. Some situation where the light variation is high, we can 
adjust the threshold values on the run. The last step is to find 
the largest contours in the segmented images and draw a 
637

rectangle box around the part which shows the output 
classified result as text. To get the sign as a text the bounding 
box is feed to the Model created using the Convolutional 
Neural Network .The models consists of different layers with 
learned weights during the training of the network. The model 
generation and recognition part is shown below. 
 
Figure 2. General diagram for the System 
B. Convolutional Neural Network 
Most of the image processing problems start with the 
extraction of relevant features which are capable of classifying 
the images to our desired classes. The main problem of 
choosing a handcrafted feature is that whenever new classes 
are added the system has to choose other methods. As a 
solution to this problem in 1990’s LeNet architecture is 
introduced which is running on the convolutional architecture. 
In our architecture different layers are included and the 
following layers are given below. 
1. Convolutional layers 
2. Pooling layers. 
3. RELU(Rectified Linear Unit) 
4. Fully connected layer 
5. Softmax layer. 
 
The 1st layer is the input layer which accept the region of 
interest in the given video frame. The input layer size is 
128x128x3. Apply convolution on the given input frame using 
3x3x3 kernel with 32 filters. On the next layer apply pooling 
of size 2 x 2 on the convoluted image and reduced this size 
into 64 x 64 size. After passing through the 3 convolutional 
layers and 3 pooling layers the size is reduced to 16 x 16 .An 
activation function called RELU is used in between the 
convolutional and pooling layers. 
In the convolutional layer our entire image is considered as a 
multidimensional array and apply convolution operation using 
convolution matrix or kernel. A convolution operation is an addition 
of its neighboring elements along with its weights. In our model we 
use a filter size of 3 x 3 on each convolution layer. 
The pooling layer is the layer which reduce the dimension of the 
image. Depending upon the pool size, in each image a single pixel is 
selected from the selected mask. Here we have used a pooling size of 
2 x 2, which will reduce the actual size of the image in to half with a 
stride 2. The pooling has been implemented by max-pooling layer 
.This operation take the maximum value in the 2 x 2 kernel. In order 
to enables the positive values we have used an activation function 
called RELU .It is called as a positive function since it only enables 
the positive values and return zero for negative values and given as 
                     
After all convolution and pooling operation the system will flatten the 
entire processed images to a liner array which becomes the node of 
the next layer. Each layer is connected to next layer with 
corresponding weights which is known as fully connected layer or 
dense layer. The output os the dense layer is called the scores and 
these scores are given to the classification layer. Here we have added 
softmax layer as classification layer. The classification layer is an 
exponential function which normalize our scores to corresponding 
probability. 
            
      
∑      
 
 
In each epochs the softmax function finds the accuracy of 
Figure 3.  Layered Architecture of R-CNN 
978-1-5386-1974-2/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
638

classification and a loss function. Here we use categorical cross 
entropy as loss function.  
                           (       
∑      
 
) 
By finding the output of the network and true value, the total 
error is calculated. Based on this error the weight has been 
update along with its learning rate and this process continues 
on each epochs called as back propagation .In the final stage 
the learned model has been saved on the disk, using this model 
the system predict new image inputs. In our system the input 
structure is an RGB image. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
The system has been trained using 300 images of each Indian 
Sign language numerals captured using RGB camera. The 
images are trained on the GPU system NVIDIA GeForce 
920MX having 2GB of graphics memory, i5 processor of 
speed 2.7 GHz and 8GB of RAM. The system takes 28 Min to 
train a model using the 300 images of Numeral signs. The 
system trained using a batch size of 16 and initial learning rate 
0f 0.001. The system attained 99.56% accuracy in 22 epochs 
.The system has experimented with different learning rate 
changing from 0.01 and activations has been updates during 
the training state. 
 
Python implementation with the Deep Learning tool 
are used in the system. The method use Keras API with 
Tensor Flow as backend. The model has checked with static 
symbols and showing good results while testing with 100 
images of test dataset. The experimental results has been 
shown in the figure 4.The figure consists of 3 frames ,one with 
the recognized sign with bounding box,2nd one is the 
processed image in HSV range and last one shows the 
segmented part using the thresholding. There is a track bar 
panel has been created and it can be used for adjusting the 
thresholding range in the real time system. Most of the part the 
system has to be adjusted the threshold as the lightness 
conditions changed. The system will not work in the situation 
where the background and skin color has same color field. The 
system is created so that it will use only 3 frames in a seconds 
for predicting the sign even though there is 30 frames are 
created in each second. The skipping of intermediate frames 
are used to increase the speed of the system since real-time 
system needs the prediction on the run. 
Here selective search algorithm has tried on the 
system, but it is found to be complex and more number of 
bounding box are created apart from the object and not useful 
in this case. Another way of doing this work is to use object 
detection model to predict the bounding box. But the training 
state has to include the images with bounding box labeled. The 
way of labelling bounding box in each image is a tedious task 
and needs much time and workers to do this. In this situation 
our system has the advantages over the above problems. 
In the dataset part the images are captured from the 
students by teaching the signs. The dataset has collected from 
different background and orientations. The only restriction to 
the development of the system is the lack of high performance 
GPU .In normal system the time for performing the learning is 
very high and the batch size has to be chosen less than 32. 
Since it does not fit in the memory. The system can also be 
trained on CPU systems, but the time will be higher than the 
GPU may be 10 times slower.  
Figure 4.  The Real-time System for Indian Sign Language 
639

V. 
 CONCLUSION  
As an initial part of Indian Sign Language recognition the real 
time system has developed for numeral signs from 0-9. The 
system has been trained using the 3000 statics symbols of 
RGB images captured using the normal camera. The system 
has used 100 images for each symbols for testing. The model 
has been created by the successful implementation of Deep 
Learning system using Region based Convolutional Neural 
Network. The system has attained an accuracy of 99.56% for 
the same subject while testing and the accuracy reduced to 
97.26% in the low light condition.  
 
In future include more symbols from alphabets of 
static symbols of Indian sign language which include double 
hand notation. The low light problems has to be solved by 
increasing the dataset. 
VI. 
REFERENCE 
 [1] Divya Deora, Nikesh Bajaj, Indian Sign Language Recognition, 2012 1st 
International Conference on Emerging Technology Trends in Electronics, 
Communication and Networking, IEEE 2012-978-1-4673-1627-9/12. 
[2] Anuja V. Nair, Bindu V., A Review on Indian Sign Language Recognition, 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) July 2013,  
Volume 73– No.22. 
[3] Jorge Badenas, Josee Miguel Sanchiz, Filiberto Pla, Motion-based 
Segmentation and Region Tracking in Image Sequences, Pattern recognition 
2001,  34, pp. 661-670. 
[4] Ping-Sung Liao, Tse-Sheng Chen, Pau-Choo Chung, 2001, A Fast 
Algorithm for Multilevel Thresholding, Journal of Information Science and 
Engineering 17, pp. 713-727 
[5] Dr. Alan M McIvor, Background subtraction techniques, Image and 
Vision Computing, Newz Zealand 2000 (IVCNZ00).  
[6] Aseema Sultana, T. Rajapushpa, Vision Based Gesture Recognition for 
Alphabetical Hand gestures Using the SVM Classifier, International Journal of 
Computer Science and Engineering Technology, Volume 3, No. 7, 2012. 
[7] Purva A. Nanivadekar, Dr. Vaishali Kulkarni, Indian Sign Language 
Recognition: Database Creation, Hand Tracking and Segmentation, 
International Conference on Circuits, Systems, Communication and 
Information Technology Applications, IEEE 2014,978-1-4799-2494-3/14. 
[8] Nagendraswamy H S, Chethana Kumara B M, Lekha Chinmayi R, Indian 
Sign Language Recognition: An Approach Based on Fuzzy-Symbolic Data, 
2016 Intl. Conference on Advances in Computing, Communications and 
Informatics (ICACCI), Sept. 21-24, 2016, 978-1-5090-2029-4/16. 
[9] J. L. Raheja , A. Mishra, A. Chaudhary, Indian Sign Language 
Recognition Using SVM, Pattern Recognition and Image Analysis, 2016, Vol. 
26, No. 2, pp. 434–441. 
[10] Pranali Loke, Juilee Paranjpe, Sayli Bhabal, Ketan Kanere, Indian Sign 
Language Converter System Using An Android App. ,International Conference 
on Electronics, Communication and Aerospace Technology, 2017 IEEE ,978-
1-5090-5686-6/17. 
[11] M.V. Beena and M.N. Agnisarman Namboodiri, ASL Numerals 
Recognition from Depth Maps Using Artificial Neural Networks, Middle-East 
Journal of Scientific Research 25 (7): 1407-1413, 2017,ISSN 1990-9233. 
 
[12] Beena M.V., Dr. M.N. Agnisarman Namboodiri, Automatic Sign 
Language Finger Spelling Using Convolution Neural Network: Analysis, 
International Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics, Volume 117 No. 20 
2017, 9-15. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
978-1-5386-1974-2/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
640

