IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2021
291
Dynamic Hand Gesture Recognition Based on
Micro-Doppler Radar Signatures Using
Hidden Gauss–Markov Models
Zetao Wang
, Gang Li
, Senior Member, IEEE, and Le Yang
Abstract—Dynamic
hand
gesture
recognition
using
the
microwave or millimeter-wave radar sensors has become a
typical technology for many human-computer interaction (HCI)
applications. In this letter, a novel method is proposed for
dynamic hand gesture recognition based on micro-Doppler radar
signatures. The short-time Fourier transform is carried out on
the raw data to obtain the time-frequency spectrogram. The time-
frequency spectrograms associated with the same dynamic hand
gesture are modeled by a hidden Gauss–Markov model (HGMM),
and the testing gesture is recognized by the maximum likelihood
criterion. Experimental results with real radar data demonstrate
that the proposed method has a strong generalization ability
for radar gesture recognition in the cases of low signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) and unknown users.
Index Terms—Dynamic hand gesture recognition, hidden
Markov model (HMM), micro-Doppler, radar sensor.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE hand gesture is deemed to be a natural way of human-
computer interaction (HCI). Gesture acquisition devices
based on optical or wearable sensors are either susceptible
to light conditions or cumbersome for routine use [1], [2].
In contrast, radar sensors can provide rich Doppler information
regardless of the illumination condition, and the kinematics
associated with different dynamic hand gestures generate dis-
tinguishable micro-Doppler signatures [3]–[6]. Thus dynamic
hand gesture recognition using the microwave or millimeter-
wave radar sensors is becoming a new trend of HCI [7], [8].
The radar sensors frequently used for gesture recogni-
tion include a frequency-modulated continuous-wave (FMCW)
radar and a continuous-wave (CW) radar [9]. The latter is
preferable than the former from the viewpoint of hardware
cost. The collection of training data is usually carried out
in short distances to guarantee sufﬁcient energy reﬂection
from the hand. However, in the cases of gesture sensing in
a relatively long distance, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of
testing samples may be much smaller than that of the training
samples. Thus it is worth investigating how to improve the
Manuscript received July 23, 2019; revised December 12, 2019; accepted
February 15, 2020. Date of publication February 26, 2020; date of cur-
rent version January 21, 2021. This work was supported by a grant from
the Institute for Guo Qiang, Tsinghua University. (Corresponding author:
Gang Li.)
The
authors
are
with
the
Department
of
Electronic
Engineering,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: wangzetao12@126.com;
gangli@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this letter are available
online at https://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/LGRS.2020.2974821
generalization ability of radar gesture sensing methods in low
SNR cases.
Generally, dynamic hand gesture recognition using a radar
sensor consists of two main steps: 1) feature extraction and
2) classiﬁcation. In step 1), a series of features are extracted
from the raw radar data via certain feature extraction tech-
niques. In [10], the principal component analysis (PCA) has
been adopted to extract the main features of the micro-
Doppler signatures. By exploiting the intrinsic sparsity of
gesture signal collected by a CW radar, a sparsity-driven
method was devised to extract the time-frequency trajectories
of dynamic hand gestures [11]. Other feature extraction tech-
niques can be found in [12] and references therein. In step 2),
the extracted features are fed into a pretrained classiﬁer
to decide the class label of the gesture. Typical classiﬁers
consist of k-nearest neighbor (kNN), support vector machine
(SVM),
backpropagation
neural
network
(BPNN),
and
so on [13].
Hidden Markov model (HMM) [14] is a powerful prob-
abilistic approach for modeling time-varying sequences.
An HMM is viewed as a doubly embedded stochastic process,
i.e., an invisible Markov chain which generates the sequence
of hidden states, and a visible process which generates the
sequence of observations. Moreover, the probability distribu-
tion of an observation depends only on the associated state.
In essence, the movements of ﬁngers and palm can be treated
as “hidden states” in a Markov model, which allows us
to formulate the micro-Doppler signatures of dynamic hand
gestures under the HMM framework.
In this letter, we intend to adopt HMMs for dynamic
hand gesture recognition using only micro-Doppler signatures.
Our method is based on the hidden Gauss–Markov models
(HGMMs) [15], in which the state vectors, as well as the
observation vectors, take values from continuums. In the
proposed method, the raw radar data of a dynamic hand gesture
is ﬁrst processed by a short-time Fourier transform (STFT)
to generate a sequence of frequency spectrogram vectors
(FSVs). Then the FSV sequences from the same gesture are
used to train the associated HGMM. In the testing phase,
the likelihoods of the testing signal under all the trained
HGMMs are compared, and the recognition is accomplished
by ﬁnding the class label corresponding to the largest likeli-
hood. Experimental results based on real data demonstrate that
the proposed method has a strong generalization ability in the
case of low SNR and unknown users.
1545-598X © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 12:52:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

292
IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2021
Fig. 1.
Spectrograms of four dynamic hand gestures performed by one
subject. (a) Holding. (b) Pushing. (c) Rotating clockwise. (d) Rotating
counterclockwise.
The rest of this letter is organized as follows. The radar
data collection is summarized in Section II. In Section III, the
proposed method is formulated in detail. Experiments on the
measured data are presented in Section IV. Finally, Section V
concludes the letter.
II. DATA COLLECTION
The hand gesture data were collected by a CW K-band radar
(Ancortek SDR-kit 2500B), as described in [16]. The radar
consists of a pair of transmitting and receiving horn antennas
both with a beamwidth of 60◦in the horizontal and vertical
directions. The radar operates at 25 GHz with a baseband sam-
pling frequency of 1 kHz and output power of 16 dBm. Four
dynamic hand gestures, i.e., 1) holding, 2) pushing, 3) rotating
clockwise, and 4) rotating counterclockwise, were considered.
The gestures were performed in front of the radar antennas at
a distance of about 0.3 m. Five subjects participated in the data
collection. For each gesture, 20 recordings per subject were
collected, thus yielding a total number of 400 recordings. For
each recording, the observation time was 0.6 s.
The time-frequency spectrograms of four dynamic hand
gestures performed by one subject are shown in Fig. 1,
where the stationary clutter has been suppressed before per-
forming STFT. Obviously, the time-frequency spectrograms
of the four dynamic hand gestures are signiﬁcantly differ-
ent, which implies the potential possibility of distinguishing
them.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
Fig. 2 illustrates the processing scheme of the proposed
method. At ﬁrst, the raw radar data of the training sam-
ples are preprocessed to generate FSV sequences. Then the
HGMMs are trained by these FSV sequences. In the testing
stage, the FSV sequence of a testing sample is fed into the
HGMM classiﬁer to decide its class label. Detailed descrip-
tions of the proposed method are given below.
Fig. 2.
Processing scheme of the proposed method.
A. Preprocessing
The recorded data contain strong echoes reﬂected from
a static human torso, which may interfere with the echoes
reﬂected from the gesturing hand, and thus, should be elim-
inated before recognition. Let s(t), t = 1, . . . , T , denote the
recorded raw radar data, where T is the total number of
sampling points. The stationary component can be canceled
by the classical moving target indication (MTI) approach, that
is
g (t) = s (t)+s (t + 2)−2s (t + 1) ,
t = 1, . . . , T −2.
(1)
Then the STFT is applied to g(t) to obtain the micro-Doppler
signatures, that is
G (m, n) =
M

t=1
w (t) g [t + (n −1) h] e−j 2πt
M

m−M
2

(2)
where w(t) is a window function, M represents the window
length, h stands for the sliding step width, m = 1, . . . , M, n =
1, . . . , N, with N = ⌊(T −M −2)/h⌋+ 1, and ⌊·⌋denotes
the operator of taking the lower integer value. In this letter, we
ﬁx M = 32, h = 16, N = 36, and use a hamming window.
After taking the logarithm of the absolute value of G(m, n),
that is
Z (m, n) = 10 log (|G (m, n)| + δ)
(3)
where δ is a small positive scalar to keep the value from being
too small, and it is set to be 10−6 in this letter, we deﬁne
zn = [Z(1, n), . . . , Z(M, n)]T as an FSV and deﬁne Z =
{z1, . . . , zN} as an FSV sequence, where (·)T represents the
transpose operator. We also normalize the elements in Z to
be within [0, 1] to eliminate the varying strengths of different
recordings.
B. Training Phase
The concept of HGMM is extended from the basic HMM by
allowing the hidden states to assume values on a continuum,
as well as supposing the probability functions are of Gaussian
form [15]. A graphical representation of HGMM is given
in Fig. 3, where the squares and circles represent hidden states
and observations, respectively.
To ﬁt the problem, in our case, we denote the hidden state
sequence as X = {x1, . . . , xN}, where xn ∈RL and L is
the dimension of the state vector. As indicated in Fig. 3,
the state vectors follow a ﬁrst-order Markov process, such
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 12:52:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

WANG et al.: DYNAMIC HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION BASED ON MICRO-DOPPLER RADAR SIGNATURES
293
Fig. 3.
Graphical representation of HGMM.
that p(xn|x1, x2, . . . , xn−1) = p(xn|xn−1) for n = 2, . . . , N,
with p(x1) being the initial state probability density. The
vectors in the observation sequence, i.e., Z = {z1, . . . , zN},
in our case, are conditionally independent, given the states.
An HGMM is thus fully characterized by a set of dis-
tributions, i.e., the a priori distribution for the initial state,
the state-transition distributions, and the observation output
distributions. Furthermore, these distributions are specialized
to the following linear Gaussian densities, respectively:
p (x1; θ1) = N (x1; µ1, P1)
(4)
p (xn|xn−1; θX) = N

xn; Anxn−1, Qn

(5)
p (zn|xn; θZ) = N (zn; Bnxn, Rn)
(6)
where N(y; µ, P) represents the Gaussian density for vec-
tor y with the mean vector µ and the nonsingular covariance
matrix P, θ1 = {µ1, P1}, θX = {(An, Qn), n = 2, . . . , N},
and θZ = {(Bn, Rn), n = 1, . . . , N}. Obviously, an HGMM is
parameterized by {θ1, θX, θZ}. The expectation-maximization
(EM) algorithm has been formulated in [15] to estimate the
HGMM parameters given the observation sequences.
In the proposed method, each class of dynamic hand ges-
tures is modeled by an HGMM. Speciﬁcally, the FSV sequence
associated with a dynamic hand gesture is recognized as
an observation sequence generated by an HGMM, and the
FSV sequences obtained from the training samples related to
this particular class of dynamic hand gestures are utilized to
estimate the HGMM parameter set. For convenience, relative
to a C-class problem, we denote λc = (θc
1, θc
X, θc
Z) as the
HGMM parameter set associated with category c, where
c = 1, . . . , C.
As shown in Fig. 2, after preprocessing the training samples,
the EM algorithm is employed to estimate the parameter set of
each HGMM. Then the trained HGMMs are utilized to build
up the HGMM classiﬁer.
C. Testing Phase
For a testing sample to be classiﬁed, after the same pre-
processing as the training stage, its FSV sequence is inputted
into the HGMM classiﬁer to determine its class label by iden-
tifying the HGMM that can best describe the FSV sequence.
In the HGMM framework, this problem can be solved by
scoring the probability that the observation sequence Z is
generated by the HGMM λc, that is
p

Z|λc
=

d X p

Z, X; λc
.
(7)
In (7), the symbol

d X stands for the multiple integral

dx1 . . .

dxN, where each single integral

dxn is a mul-
tidimensional integration over the state space; p(Z, X; λc)
denotes the joint probability of Z and X, and it is cast as
p Z, X; λc = p (x1) p (z1|x1)
N

n=2
p (xn|xn−1) p (zn|xn)
(8)
where the explicit parameters, i.e., θc
1, θc
X, and θc
Z, on the right-
hand side of (8) are dropped for convenience. Equation (7) can
be computed by the forward-backward algorithm formulated
in [15]. Finally, the maximum likelihood criterion is employed
for the class label assignment task, that is
Class (Z) = arg max
c

p

Z|λc
.
(9)
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we assess the performance of the proposed
HGMM-based method in terms of recognition accuracy. The
PCA-based methods, the sparsity-driven method [11], as well
as the long short-term memory (LSTM) method [17] are used
for comparison. For the proposed method, the iteration number
of the EM algorithm is set as 30, the HGMM parameters are
initialized as follows: µ1 is initialized as a full-zero vector;
An, n = 2, . . . , N, and Bn, n = 1, . . . , N, are initialized
as random matrices; P1, Qn, n = 2, . . . , N, and Rn, n =
1, . . . , N, are initialized as scaled identity matrices with scale
factor 105. For the PCA-based methods, we ﬁrst vectorize each
training FSV sequence and then stack them into a data matrix;
the largest ﬁve principal components of the data matrix form
the feature extraction matrix; the kNN and BPNN classiﬁer
are adopted for recognition. For the PCA-kNN, the number of
neighbors is set as ﬁve, and the Euclidean distance is adopted.
For the PCA-BPNN, the hidden layer has ten neurons. For
the sparsity-driven method, the sparsity level is set to be 17,
while other parameters are the same as that used in [11]. For
the LSTM method, the number of hidden units is 100, and the
FSV sequences are taken as input.
A. Effect of State Vector Dimension on Recognition
Accuracy
In the ﬁrst experiment, we investigate the effect of the
state vector dimension L on the recognition performance of
the proposed method. The state vector dimension takes value
from 4 to 16, with an increased step of 2. For each gesture,
we randomly select 40 recordings from the related data as
training samples, with the rest of the data as testing samples.
To be precise, the training samples for each gesture are equally
selected from the subjects, and the training samples from
each subject are randomly selected. The experimental results
averaged over 100 Monte Carlo runs are illustrated in Fig. 4.
As revealed in Fig. 4, the HGMM-based method achieves
very stable recognition accuracies for different state vector
dimensions. This indicates that the HGMM-based method
is not sensitive to the value of the state vector dimension.
In the following experiments, we ﬁx the state vector dimension
as four.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 12:52:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

294
IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2021
Fig. 4.
Recognition accuracy versus state vector dimension for the HGMM-
based method in the case of 40 training samples for each gesture.
B. Effect of Noise Level on Recognition Accuracy
As introduced in Section II, the raw data were collected by
performing dynamic hand gestures just in front of the radar.
On the other hand, the need for long-distance applications
exist in practice. Longer distance implies lower SNR; thus,
we investigate the recognition accuracies of the methods under
different noise levels. To simulate low SNR data, we treat the
raw data collected in our experiments as pure signals and add
different levels of white Gauss noise to them in the following
way:
s′i, j,c = si, j,c + n
(10)
where si, j,c stands for the ith vector-form recorded raw data
that belongs to class c and performed by subject j, n represents
the added white Gauss noise, s′i, j,c denotes the simulated low
SNR gesture data. For ease of exposition, we deﬁne the SNR
as
SNR =
C
c=1
J
j=1
I
i=1 ∥si, j,c∥2
2
C J I∥n∥2
2
(11)
where I, J, and C represent the number of recordings for each
subject and each class, the number of subjects, and the number
of classes, respectively, and ∥· ∥2 denotes the L2 norm.
In this experiment, we randomly select 60 samples for
each gesture to generate the training set, while the remaining
samples are used to generate the testing set, and the noise
is only added to the testing samples. The recognition results
based on 100 Monte Carlo trials are plotted in Fig. 5.
From Fig. 5 it is clear that the recognition accuracies for
each method are improved with increased SNR. Notably, the
HGMM-based method outperforms all other methods in all
the SNR settings. The reason is that the probability function
in HGMMs encompasses noise modeling, which makes the
HGMM-based method more robust to noise. However, for the
other methods, the features extracted from a low SNR testing
sample can deviate a lot from the features extracted from the
training samples of the same class, so degraded recognition
performances are induced. The results in Fig. 5 indicate that
the HGMM-based method has much better generalization
ability in low SNR situations, which makes it more suitable
for the applications of long-distance gesture sensing.
Fig. 5.
Recognition accuracies under different noise levels.
Fig. 6.
Confusion matrices under the case of 30-dB SNR for each
gesture. (a) PCA-kNN. (b) PCA-BPNN. (c) Sparsity-driven. (d) LSTM.
(e) HGMM-based.
TABLE I
TIME CONSUMPTION FOR EACH METHOD
To more clearly visualize the recognition results, the confu-
sion matrices of these methods under the case of 30-dB SNR
are drawn in Fig. 6.
As depicted in Fig. 6, the confusion matrix of the
HGMM-based method exhibits a strong diagonal pattern,
indicating that all of these four gestures can be accurately
classiﬁed. It can also be seen that gestures (c) and (d) tend to
be misclassiﬁed by other methods in the case of low SNR.
The reason lies in the fact that the features extracted by
other methods for gestures (c) and (d) are more likely to be
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 12:52:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

WANG et al.: DYNAMIC HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION BASED ON MICRO-DOPPLER RADAR SIGNATURES
295
Fig. 7.
Recognition accuracies for unknown users under different noise
levels.
contaminated by noise as these two gestures last for longer
time intervals.
C. Recognition Accuracy for Unknown Users
In this experiment, we aim to verify the performance
of the HGMM-based method in recognizing dynamic hand
gestures of unknown users. For doing so, the recordings from
three subjects are used to construct the training set, and the
recordings from the other two subjects are used to construct
the testing set. Therefore, totally, there are ten combinations
for data set partition. Only the testing samples are added
with noise. The numerical results obtained by averaging over
100 Monte Carlo trails (ten for each combination), are given
in Fig. 7.
As exposed in Fig. 7, the HGMM-based method gets the
best recognition accuracy among all these methods under all
the SNR settings. By comparing the curves in Fig. 7 and that
in Fig. 5, it is easy to see that the HGMM-based method does
not show signiﬁcant performance differences in the cases of
known and unknown users.
D. Analysis About the Time Complexity
The computational time elapsed by each method for testing
one sample is reported in Table I, where the results are
averaged over 100 trials. The hardware platform is a desktop
PC equipped with an Intel Core i5-8500 CPU and a 16-GB
RAM running MATLAB 2019a on Windows 10.
It can be seen that the HGMM-based method consumes
more time than the PCA-kNN, PCA-BPNN, and LSTM meth-
ods, but it consumes less time than the sparsity-driven method.
V. CONCLUSION
An HGMM-based method is proposed for recognizing
dynamic hand gestures using micro-Doppler radar signatures.
Experiments on real radar data have demonstrated that the
proposed method has a strong generalization ability in the
cases of low SNR and unknown users. In the future, we
would like to investigate the problem of radar-based dynamic
hand gesture recognition in more complicated situations by
appealing to the outstanding modeling capability of HGMM.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Wang, S. Wang, M. Zhou, Q. Jiang, and Z. Tian, “TS-I3D based
hand gesture recognition method with radar sensor,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 22902–22913, 2019.
[2] T. Sakamoto, X. Gao, E. Yavari, A. Rahman, O. Boric-Lubecke, and
V. M. Lubecke, “Hand gesture recognition using a radar echo I–Q plot
and a convolutional neural network,” IEEE Sens. Lett., vol. 2, no. 3,
Sep. 2018, Art. no. 7000904.
[3] Z. Chen, G. Li, F. Fioranelli, and H. Grifﬁths, “Personnel recognition and
gait classiﬁcation based on multistatic micro-Doppler signatures using
deep convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 669–673, May 2018.
[4] H. Du, T. Jin, Y. Song, and Y. Dai, “Unsupervised adversarial
domain adaptation for micro-Doppler based human activity classiﬁ-
cation,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 62–66,
Jan. 2020.
[5] Y. Lang, Q. Wang, Y. Yang, C. Hou, D. Huang, and W. Xiang,
“Unsupervised domain adaptation for micro-Doppler human motion
classiﬁcation via feature fusion,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 392–396, Mar. 2019.
[6] M. S. Seyﬁoglu and S. Z. Gurbuz, “Deep neural network initialization
methods for micro-Doppler classiﬁcation with low training sample sup-
port,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 2462–2466,
Dec. 2017.
[7] S. Wang, J. Song, J. Lien, I. Poupyrev, and O. Hilliges, “Interacting with
soli: Exploring ﬁne-grained dynamic gesture recognition in the radio-
frequency spectrum,” in Proc. 29th Annu. Symp. User Interface Softw.
Technol. (UIST), 2016, pp. 851–860.
[8] J. M. Lien et al., “Soli: Ubiquitous gesture sensing with millimeter wave
radar,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 35, no. 4, 2016, Art. no. 142.
[9] S. Z. Gurbuz and M. G. Amin, “Radar-based human-motion recognition
with deep learning: Promising applications for indoor monitoring,” IEEE
Signal Process. Mag., vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 16–28, Jul. 2019.
[10] A. Balleri, K. Chetty, and K. Woodbridge, “Classiﬁcation of personnel
targets by acoustic micro-Doppler signatures,” IET Radar, Sonar Navi-
gat., vol. 5, no. 9, pp. 943–951, 2011.
[11] G. Li, R. Zhang, M. Ritchie, and H. Grifﬁths, “Sparsity-driven micro-
Doppler feature extraction for dynamic hand gesture recognition,”
IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 655–665,
Apr. 2018.
[12] B. Erol, M. G. Amin, and S. Z. Gurbuz, “Automatic data-driven
frequency-warped cepstral feature design for micro-Doppler classiﬁca-
tion,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1724–1738,
Aug. 2018.
[13] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2006.
[14] L. R. Rabiner, “A tutorial on hidden Markov-models and selected appli-
cations in speech recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 257–286,
Feb. 1989.
[15] P. L. Ainsleigh, N. Kehtarnavaz, and R. L. Streit, “Hidden Gauss-Markov
models for signal classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 50,
no. 6, pp. 1355–1367, Jun. 2002.
[16] L. Yang and G. Li, “Sparsity aware dynamic gesture recognition using
radar sensors with angular diversity,” IET Radar, Sonar Navigat., vol. 12,
no. 10, pp. 1114–1120, Oct. 2018.
[17] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 12:52:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

