IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2022
6227
Dynamic Hand Gesture Recognition Using
Improved Spatio-Temporal Graph
Convolutional Network
Jae-Hun Song
, Kyeongbo Kong
, and Suk-Ju Kang
, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Hand gesture recognition is essential to human-
computer interaction as the most natural way of communicating.
Furthermore, with the development of 3D hand pose estimation
technology and the performance improvement of low-cost depth
cameras, skeleton-based dynamic hand gesture recognition has
received much attention. This paper proposes a novel multi-
stream improved spatio-temporal graph convolutional network
(MS-ISTGCN) for skeleton-based dynamic hand gesture recog-
nition. We adopt an adaptive spatial graph convolution that can
learn the relationship between distant hand joints and propose
an extended temporal graph convolution with multiple dilation
rates that can extract informative temporal features from short
to long periods. Furthermore, we add a new attention layer
consisting of effective spatio-temporal attention and channel
attention between the spatial and temporal graph convolution
layers to ﬁnd and focus on key features. Finally, we propose
a multi-stream structure that feeds multiple data modalities
(i.e., joints, bones, and motions) as inputs to improve performance
using the ensemble technique. Each of the three-stream networks
is independently trained and fused to predict the ﬁnal hand
gesture. The performance of the proposed method is veriﬁed
through extensive experiments with two widely used public
dynamic hand gesture datasets: SHREC’17 Track and DHG-
14/28. Our proposed method achieves the highest recognition
accuracy in various gesture categories for both datasets compared
with state-of-the-art methods.
Index Terms—Hand skeleton, graph convolutional network,
graph attention, multi-stream network.
I. INTRODUCTION
H
AND gestures are body language that enable natural
communication through the center of the palm and the
ﬁnger position. They are classiﬁed into static and dynamic
Manuscript received 5 January 2022; revised 15 March 2022; accepted
29 March 2022. Date of publication 5 April 2022; date of current version
6 September 2022. This research is supported by Ministry of Culture,
Sports and Tourism and Korea Creative Content Agency (Project Num-
ber: R2020040058), and the Korea Agency for Infrastructure Technology
Advancement (KAIA) grant funded by the Ministry of the Interior and Safety
(Grant 22PQWO-C153369-04), and Convergent Technology R&D Program
for Human Augmentation through the National Research Foundation of Korea
(NRF) funded by Ministry of Science and ICT (2020M3C1B8081320). This
article was recommended by Associate Editor C. Chen. (Corresponding
author: Suk-Ju Kang.)
Jae-Hun Song and Suk-Ju Kang are with the Vision and Display Systems
Laboratory for Electronic Engineering, Sogang University, Seoul 04017,
South Korea (e-mail: songjh1@sogang.ac.kr; sjkang@sogang.ac.kr).
Kyeongbo Kong is with the Media School, Pukyong National University,
Busan 48547, South Korea (e-mail: kbkong@pknu.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2022.3165069.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TCSVT.2022.3165069
gestures [1], [2]. A static hand gesture is represented by the
stable shape of the hand from a single image of station-
ary gestures, whereas a dynamic hand gesture additionally
includes movement from a sequence of a hand such as waving.
Dynamic hand gesture recognition is becoming increasingly
crucial and used in various applications such as sign language
communication [3], human-computer interaction [4], virtual
reality [5], [6], robot control [7], [8], and game control [9].
The primary approaches to hand gesture research can be
divided into the wearable glove-based sensor approach and the
vision-based approach [10]. Glove-based methods [11] using
gloves to obtain hand movement information cannot be widely
used because they require expensive hardware equipment
and have restrictions in wearing them directly. Therefore,
studies on the natural vision-based method [12]–[35] have
been active because they are relatively inexpensive and do not
require equipment. The hand gesture data used in vision-based
methods can be divided into two modalities: image-based
(e.g., RGB videos or depth image sequences) and skeleton-
based.
Compared
with
image-based
methods
[12]–[16],
skeleton-based methods [17]–[35] have the advantage of being
more discriminative and biologically informative in expressing
hand gestures. They are also robust to various illuminations
and complex backgrounds. Because the position of the joint
is expressed in 3D coordinates, its data size is smaller, and its
computational efﬁciency is higher than RGB or depth images.
Furthermore, the wide use of advanced hardware devices
such as Microsoft Kinect [36] and Intel RealSense [37] has
recently made it easier to obtain depth sequences. The continu-
ous development of hand pose estimation algorithms [38]–[42]
to predict 3D coordinates from acquired depth images has
enabled accurate hand skeleton sequences to be generated in
real-time. Due to these advantages, skeleton-based hand ges-
ture recognition has become increasingly popular and widely
used in recent research. This paper focuses on this skeleton-
based dynamic hand gesture recognition task.
Skeleton-based dynamic hand gesture recognition is still a
challenging task, to which the feature extraction method is
critical. Feature extraction can be divided into two main meth-
ods: handcrafted features and deep learning-based features.
Conventional skeleton-based gesture recognition methods ana-
lyze spatial features through handcrafted features [17]–[21].
However, these handcrafted features cannot efﬁciently model
spatial and temporal meaningful information. Methods using
deep learning-based features [22]–[35] feed hand skele-
1051-8215 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 05:33:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

6228
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2022
Fig. 1.
Overall architecture of the proposed method with multi-stream improved ST-GCN. This architecture consists of ISTGCN blocks, and the marked
number denotes the feature dimensions. There are three modalities fed into the network separately: joints, bones, and motions. Each modality corresponds to
one stream. The ﬁnal gesture is predicted as the weighted summation of the three softmax scores.
ton sequences to recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) networks for hand
gesture recognition. However, these methods cannot fully
exploit spatial connection information between joints in each
frame and temporal connection information between joints in
consecutive frames.
Recently, graph convolutional networks (GCNs) among
deep learning-based methods have been widely used to learn
high-level graph structure features and have exhibited high
performance. Yan et al. [43] ﬁrst proposed a spatio-temporal
GCN (ST-GCN) that extracts the two features (spatial and tem-
poral) by applying GCN for the skeleton-based human action
recognition task. Since then, several studies have applied this
method to action recognition task [44]–[52] and dynamic
hand gesture recognition task [53], [54]. It is also applied to
application tasks such as driver behavior recognition [55].
However, those previous studies are insufﬁcient for the hand
gesture recognition task because pre-ﬁxed graphs based on
the hand skeleton’s physical connection structure are used
for spatial information extraction. Furthermore, because these
ST-GCN methods only use the original 3D coordinates of the
joint as inputs, motion information such as the trajectory of the
hand and the length or direction features of the bones between
the two joints cannot be captured.
This paper proposes a novel improved spatio-temporal graph
convolutional network for dynamic hand gesture recognition.
Fig. 1 illustrates the overall architecture of the proposed
method. We adopt a multi-stream structure that uses joint,
bone, and joint motion information as inputs for skeleton-
based dynamic hand gesture recognition. The fusion of
three-stream networks demonstrates a signiﬁcant performance
improvement compared with the previous single input stream
method. These stream networks are independently trained
using the same network architecture and fused to predict
the hand gesture class. We increase the model’s ﬂexibility
by adopting an adaptive graph convolution layer to extract
informative spatial features from different samples. We then
apply an attention mechanism to ﬁnd and selectively focus
on key differential information on the activation of joints,
frames, and channels. Furthermore, multiple-scale temporal
modeling is applied using temporal convolutions with different
dilatation rates to extract temporal features from gestures
of different lengths. We demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed architecture by performing extensive experiments on
two widely used public benchmark datasets: SHREC’17 Track
and DHG-14/28.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) We propose a novel ST-GCN block that extracts the
enhanced spatial and temporal features. In each block,
the adaptive spatial graph convolution layer extracts
improved spatial features compared with the static graph
containing only limited connection information, and the
temporal convolution layer with different dilation rates
extends the receptive ﬁeld to extract more informative
temporal features
2) The newly proposed spatial and temporal co-attention
increases the representation of features by jointly consid-
ering each dependency as a pair of spatial and temporal
directions. Moreover, we apply channel attention together
to improve performance further.
3) We further improve performance using low-level features
by proposing, for the ﬁrst time, a multi-stream network
using three modalities—joints, bones, and motions—for
a hand gesture recognition task.
4) We
conducted
extensive
ablation
experiments
on
skeleton-based dynamic hand gesture recognition and
action recognition datasets. Experimental results on pub-
lic hand gesture recognition datasets show that the pro-
posed method achieves better performance than previous
state-of-the-art methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
reviews the related work. The proposed multi-stream network
is described in Section III, and extensive experimental results
are presented in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes the
paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Some representative and related work on dynamic hand ges-
ture recognition are introduced in this section. We discuss the
latest work which apply attention mechanism in dynamic hand
gesture recognition. Furthermore, we review recent studies
extracting spatial features using GCNs.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 05:33:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

SONG et al.: DYNAMIC HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION USING ISTGCN
6229
A. Skeleton-Based Dynamic Hand Gesture Recognition
As previously introduced, dynamic hand gesture recognition
can be divided into two categories according to features:
handcrafted feature-based methods and deep learning-based
methods.
Handcrafted feature-based methods [17]–[21] encode hand
skeleton sequences into handcrafted features. Smedt et al. [17]
designed effective descriptors using the hand joints provided
by the depth camera as a representative method. These hand-
crafted descriptors represent the geometric shape of the hand
and the combined features of the wrist rotation and hand direc-
tion. Each descriptor is encoded in a Fisher vector—an image
representation obtained by pooling local image features using
the Gaussian mixture model (GMM). A temporal pyramid is
used to encode temporal features, and a linear support vector
machine (SVM) classiﬁer is applied in the ﬁnal step to classify
the gesture class.
Deep learning-based methods [22]–[35] encode the hand
skeleton sequences into coordinate vectors and feed them
into RNNs, CNNs, and GCNs to extract spatial and temporal
features for gesture recognition. Chen et al. [22] proposed a
model to learn the motion features of hand gestures using
an RNN. This model used two features to represent ﬁnger
movements of a hand skeleton and global movements of
rotation and translation, respectively. A bidirectional RNN was
then applied to recognize hand gestures. Nunez et al. [27]
arranged hand skeleton sequences as pseudo images. Frames
correspond to columns of the image, joints to rows, and 3D
coordinates to its three channels. Furthermore, this model
applied a 2D CNN to extract spatial and temporal features
for ﬁnal gesture classiﬁcation. However, these methods cannot
effectively use spatio-temporal contexts such as connection
information between hand joints in each frame and hand joint
connection information between frames. Nguyen et al. [32]
used manifold learning to improve gesture recognition.
Low-dimensional symmetric positive deﬁnite (SPD) matrices
learned from skeleton data are more discriminative. However,
this method models skeleton sequences in a predeﬁned struc-
ture. Therefore, it cannot capture efﬁciently the features of
joint relationships.
In contrast, GCN-based methods can exploit this informa-
tion. Li et al. [54] ﬁrst applied an ST-GCN [43] for a human
action recognition task to a dynamic hand gesture recognition
task. This model established three types of additional edges
and ﬁxed edges by kinematic links to capture the relationship
between non-adjacent joints more precisely. However, because
the form of the spatial graph was ﬁxed, it was not practical for
handling various spatial joint relationships for different hand
gestures. In addition, it could not model the temporal joint
connections between frames sufﬁciently due to the use of a
ﬁxed temporal dimension.
B. Skeleton-Based Human Action Recognition
The skeleton-based action recognition task is similar to
the skeleton-based hand gesture recognition task. Several
methods of skeleton-based action recognition can be gener-
alized to hand gesture recognition. In this section, we review
GCN-based methods, which are being actively studied among
deep learning-based methods. Yan et al. [43] ﬁrst embedded a
skeleton sequence into a spatio-temporal graph. In their graph,
the spatial edge was ﬁxed by the natural human skeleton, and
the temporal edge connected two joints at the same position
between consecutive frames. ST-GCN was then proposed to
extract spatial and temporal features of the skeleton sequence
for action class recognition. Since that study, various GCN-
based methods [44]–[56] have been proposed to improve
performance. Shi et al. [44] proposed a two-stream adaptive
GCN (2s-AGCN) that can adaptively learn graph topology.
In addition to the ﬁrst-order information of original joint
coordinates, the length and direction of the bone were used as
second-order information of the joint data. Liu et al. [49] pro-
posed a uniﬁed spatio-temporal convolution (G3D) and multi-
scale graph convolution network. The proposed multi-scale
aggregation method disentangled the importance of nodes in
different neighborhoods for effective long-range modeling.
Zhang et al. [50] adopted a data preprocessing strategy, whose
inputs include position, velocity, joint type, and frame index.
This data preprocessing module can signiﬁcantly reduce the
model size, but its performance is lower than other methods.
Shi et al. [45] applied an ensemble of four models, trained
with the joint, bone, joint motion, and bone motion features.
Although these methods achieve signiﬁcant accuracy, the
increased computational cost due to the multi-stream structure
and 3D convolution hinder practical application. Therefore,
there is a need for a smaller-sized single stream and an efﬁcient
multi-stream network which is fusing optimal input features.
C. Attention Mechanism
Recently, the attention mechanism is widely used in various
tasks. Some works [35], [53], [56] have been applying the
attention mechanism for dynamic hand gesture recognition.
Hou et al. [35] proposed a model that learns different attention
levels. They assigned each level to a spatio-temporal feature
extracted by the convolution network. This model applied
the mask branch to focus adaptively on informative time
frames and features. Chen et al. [53] constructed dynamic
graphs using spatial-temporal attention. They applied the self-
attention mechanism that is performed in both spatial and
temporal domains.
With respect to action recognition, Si et al. [56] proposed
an attention-enhanced graph convolutional long short-term
memory network (AGC-LSTM) to select discriminative spatial
information. Shi et al. [45] proposed an attention mechanism
consisting of three parts: spatial, temporal, and channel atten-
tion modules. The attention mechanism is used to enhance the
information of key joints in each layer.
Compared with the previous works that apply attention
mechanism on spatial domain or temporal domain separately,
we use the spatial and temporal co-attention to obtain more
discriminative features in GCN for the dynamic hand gesture
recognition.
D. Spatial Graph Convolution Network
The input of traditional CNNs is usually Euclidean data
in the form of regular grids such as images or videos.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 05:33:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

6230
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2022
Fig. 2.
SHREC’17 Track [61] and the DHG-14/28 [17] collected in the same
way: (a) Hand skeleton with 22 hand joints. The cross marks the center of
gravity. And the three subsets are divided into a root node (red color) and a
centripetal group (gray color) closer to the root node and a centrifugal group
(green color) farther than the root node. (b) Two hand shapes (one ﬁnger and
the whole hand).
However, because the graph is irregular in shape and size,
it is not suitable to model graph data because CNNs use a grid
kernel. Hand gesture skeleton data comprise a graph structure,
and an adjacency matrix or a Laplacian matrix [57] is used to
analyze the features more accurately.
The spatial skeleton graph can be represented by G =
{V, E}, where V is the vertex (node) set, and E is the edge set.
The spatial graph convolution network aggregates information
from the node features of the graph. The features of adjacent
nodes are aggregated by an aggregation function. Therefore,
the convolution of the spatial graph is calculated according
to the neighborhood of nodes—it is important to select the
neighborhood nodes of the graph. We adopted the spatial
partition strategy proposed by Yan et al. [43] of dividing
neighborhood nodes into three subsets. As shown in Fig. 2(a),
three subsets consist of the root node itself, centripetal group,
and centrifugal group. The center of gravity was ﬁrst generated
by calculating the average coordinates of all hand joints. With
this center of gravity as a reference point, the centripetal group
contains the neighborhood nodes close to the center of gravity,
and the centrifugal group contains the neighborhood nodes
farther away from the center of gravity.
The adjacency matrix and degree matrix are denoted by A
and D, expressed as follows:
D (i, i) =

j
A (i, j) + α,
(1)
where A(i, j) indicates whether nodes of i and j are connected.
D(i, i) is the diagonal node degree matrix, and α is set to
0.001 to avoid zero.
The adjacency matrix A is normalized by the degree matrix
D according to [57] as follows:
Anorm = D−1/2 AD−1/2.
(2)
The spatial convolution operation can be expressed as an
ST-GCN [43]:
fout (vi) =

v j∈Bi
1
Zij
fin

v j

· w

li

v j

,
(3)
Fig. 3.
Structure of the ISTGCN block. The block comprises a spatial graph
convolution layer, attention layer, and temporal graph convolution layer—
with a residual connection for each block, except for ﬁrst block. The ﬁrst
embedding block for embedding 3-channel input data into 64-channel features
does not apply the residual connection.
where fin(v j) is the feature map for node v j and Bi is the
neighborhood set for node vi. w is the weighting function
similar to the convolution operation that calculates a weight
vector.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
This section presents the architecture and components of
our proposed MS-ISTGCN in detail.
A. Network Architecture
The overall proposed architecture is depicted in Fig. 1,
where
the
basic
structure
is
designed
based
on
an
ST-GCN [43]. The network comprises eight improved spatio-
temporal graph convolution blocks connected in series (refer
to Section IV). Based on the settings in [27], the input data
with the size of Cin × T ×V is normalized by the batch
normalization (BN) layer for the ﬁrst time. Cin is the number
of channels, and the 3D coordinates of joints are the input,
so its value is 3. T is the number of frames in each sequence,
and V is the number of joints of hand skeleton data.
The input data are fed to the ISTGCN block as depicted in
Fig. 3, and high-level features are gradually extracted through
eight blocks. Each ISTGCN block consists of three layers
connected in the order of a spatial graph convolution layer
(GCL), an attention layer, and a temporal GCL. The blocks
have 64, 64, 64, 64, 128, 128, 256, and 256 output channels,
respectively. The convolution stride of the ﬁfth and seventh
blocks is set to 2 to reduce the length of the frame sequence.
The output feature of the last eighth block is averaged as
a feature map with 256 channels using a global average
pooling (GAP) layer. The fully connected (FC) layer and
softmax are then used to obtain the ﬁnal class prediction.
B. Spatial Graph Convolution Layer
The GCN-based recognition task’s graph topology—ﬁxed
by depending only on physical connections—reﬂects insufﬁ-
cient latent information between skeletons. Therefore, some
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 05:33:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

SONG et al.: DYNAMIC HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION USING ISTGCN
6231
previous studies have tried to design an optimal graph topol-
ogy. As introduced in Section II, ST-GCN [43] transforms
Equation (3) into the following:
fout =
Kv

k
Wk fin(Ak ⊗Mk),
(4)
where Kv is the kernel size of the spatial dimension and the
number of subsets is 3 due to the spatial partition strategy.
Wk is a weight vector of a 1 × 1 convolution operation. Ak
is the normalized adjacency matrix expressed in Equation (2).
For each adjacency matrix Ak, we use a V × V learnable
attention map Mk to represent the importance of each edge.
⊗denotes element-wise multiplication.
In our network, Equation (3) is transformed into the
following:
α · fout =
Kv

k
Wk fin(Ak + Bk + Ck),
(5)
where Ak is the normalized adjacency matrix. Bk is an adap-
tive graph for global attention with all values parameterized,
and it functions similar to Mk in the ST-GCN. Ck is a sample
individual adaptive graph representing the similarity that deter-
mines the connection strength of two joints in the embedded
space. The normalized Gaussian function calculated by the
softmax operation, used in the non-local structure, is applied
to calculate similarity Ck. A parameterized coefﬁcient α is
multiplied with Ck to adjust the importance of the individual
graph for each ISTGCN block.
Based on the successful performance of the adaptive
GCN [44] for action recognition, we construct a spatial graph
convolution layer for dynamic hand gesture recognition as
depicted in Fig. 4(a). The output of the spatial graph con-
volution layer can be formulated as follows:
fspatial = ReLU [BN ( fout) + I ( fin)] ,
(6)
where BN is the batch normalization, and I is the identity
mapping for stability during training. ReLU is then applied as
an activation function.
C. Extended Temporal Convolution Layer
Previous studies including ST-GCN [43], [44], [54], aggre-
gate temporal features by performing ×1 convolution with
one temporal kernel size ( ) throughout the architecture.
Therefore, the sampling range R (vt) for the temporal dimen-
sion can be written as:
R (vt) =

vq |q −t| ≤

2

,
(7)
where vt represents the joints in frame t. Previous studies
typically use a 9 × 1 kernel, which aggregates information
from the joints of each of the four frames before and after the
target joint.
We design a structure that can perform multiple-scale tem-
poral aggregation to model hand gestures of different lengths.
As depicted in Fig. 4(b), the proposed extended temporal
graph convolution layer consists of four branches. We use
Fig. 4.
Architecture of our spatial graph and temporal graph convolution
layers: (a) adaptive spatial graph convolution (GC) layer and (b) extended
temporal graph convolution (E-TGC) layer. ‘1 × 1’ block denotes 1 × 1 con-
volution operation and the orange block indicates that the part is the learnable
parameter. The term “d” of 7 × 1 convolutions in temporal GC layer is
“dilation.”
a bottleneck structure [58] with 1 × 1 convolution to reduce
the computational cost caused by the branches. The number of
channels in each branch is set to the number of input channels
divided by four (the number of branches). Thus, the number
of channels in the concatenated feature is equal to the number
of input channels. We extend the receptive ﬁeld by applying
three different dilation rates (d = 1, 2, 3) to three temporal
convolutions with a kernel size of 7 × 1. The features of the
four branches are concatenated, and a residual path is added
to facilitate training. The proposed method refers to the multi-
scale graph convolution network proposed by Liu et al. [49],
but it is optimized in terms of performance and model size for
the hand gesture recognition task. Unlike the structure of [49],
we simplify the number of branches of the temporal GC layer
from six to four, and the number of temporal GC layers is
reduced from three to one by applying convolutions with the
optimal kernel size.
D. Graph Attention Layer
Recently, the application of an attention mechanism in a
convolution block has received much attention and has been
used in many studies [45], [46], [59], [60]. Squeeze-and-
Excitation Network (SENet) [59] is a representative algorithm
that has signiﬁcantly improved the performance of various
deep CNN architectures. Studies on various types of attention
structures [46], [60] have been actively conducted.
Several methods have been proposed for skeleton-based
action recognition. Shi et al. [45] sequentially applied attention
to each spatial, temporal, and channel dimension. Recently,
Song et al. [46] proposed an attention method for joint spatio-
temporal information inspired by coordinate attention [60] for
CNNs.
The attention layer of [46] is a structure in which the
channel dimension is reduced and increased again using two
FC layers, such as SENet, to perform the spatio-temporal joint
attention and channel attention together. However, a loss of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 05:33:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

6232
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2022
Fig. 5. Effective spatio-temporal co-attention (Eff-ST attention) layer. Wv and
Wt are 1 × 1 convolutions. 	 denotes the outer product and ⊗denotes the
element-wise multiplication.
Fig. 6.
Channel attention layer consisting of two FC layers. ⊗denotes the
element-wise multiplication.
Fig. 7.
Proposed attention layer consisting of two sub-layers. A residual
connection is respectively added for each sub-layer to stabilize the training.
spatio-temporal information occurs due to channel reduction.
Therefore, we introduce an effective spatio-temporal attention
(Eff-ST) layer without loss of information while preserving
co-attention of the spatio-temporal dimension, as depicted in
Fig. 5. This novel attention layer does not perform channel
reduction after average pooling. One 1 × 1 convolution is
applied for each spatial and temporal direction to prevent
information loss. Furthermore, the channel attention layer
used in [45] is applied to emphasize the key information
on the channel dimension, as depicted in Fig. 6. Therefore,
we design effective attention layers composed of two sub-
layers by adding them as a series, as depicted in Fig. 7.
The formula of the effective spatio-temporal co-attention
(Ast) is as follows:
Ast = σ

AvgPoolv ( fin) · Wv

⊙σ

AvgPoolt ( fin) · Wt

,
(8)
fout = Ast ⊗fin ⊕fin,
(9)
where fin and fout are input and output features, respectively.
AvgPool is average pooling. ⊙and ⊗denote channel-wise
outer-product and element-wise multiplication, respectively.
⊕is for element-wise summation. σ is Sigmoid activation
function, Wv ∈RC×C and Wt ∈RC×C are the learnable
weights of two convolutions, respectively.
The channel attention layer generates the channel weights
using two nonlinear FC layers and a sigmoid activation func-
tion after GAP for the channel. The formulation of the channel
attention (Ac) layer is as follows:
Ac = σ(

ReLU

Global AvgPoolc ( fin) · W1

· W2)),
(10)
fout = Ac ⊗fin ⊕fin,
(11)
where W1 and W2 are the weights of two FC layers, respec-
tively.
Algorithm 1 presents the pseudocode for the proposed
attention layer.
Algorithm 1 Proposed Eff-ST and Ch Attention Layers
def attention_layer(x):
# input_feature x (C, T, V )
# Note: Pseudo code for Attention Layers
# (channels,
frames, joints)
Xs = Avg_Pool(x)
# shape = (C, 1, V )
Xs = Conv_v(Xs)
Xs = Sigmoid(Xs)
# shape = (C, 1, V )
Xt = Avg_Pool(x)
# shape = (C, T, 1)
Xt = Conv_t(Xt)
Xt = Sigmoid(Xt)
# shape = (C, T, 1)
X = OuterProduct(Xs, Xt)
# shape = (C, T, V)
X = Elementwise_Mul(x, X)
# Output of Eff-ST attention
Yin = x + X
# Input of Channel attention
Ych_pool = Global_Avg_Pool(Yin)
# shape = (C, 1, 1)
Ych_pool = FC1(Ych_pool)
# shape = (C/2, 1, 1)
Ych_pool = ReLU(Ych_pool)
Ych_pool= FC2(Ych_pool)
# shape = (C, 1, 1)
Ych_pool= Sigmoid(Ych_pool)
# shape = (C, 1, 1)
Y = Elementwise_Mul(Yin, Ych_pool)
# shape = (C, T, V )
Y = Yin + Y
returnY
# output_feature (C, T, V )
E. Multi-Stream Network
We design a multi-stream network using three different data
modalities, as depicted in Fig. 1. We use an ensemble strategy
of fusing after training each of the three networks with the
same architecture. In addition to the original joint coordinates
provided by the datasets, the length and direction information
of the bones and joints motion information can further improve
the performance of skeleton-based recognition tasks. The three
modalities we use as inputs to each stream network are joints,
bones, and motion, respectively. Joint coordinates can be
represented as follows:
Ji,t = xi,t, yi,t, zi,t
 , ∀i ∈V, t ∈T
(12)
For example, as shown in Fig. 2(a), the dynamic hand
gesture recognition dataset uses 22 joints, and each ﬁnger has
4 joints. The length of the bone is calculated as the difference
between the two adjacent joints, and the direction of the bone
is away from the center of gravity of the joints. In Fig. 2(a),
dots and solid lines represent joints and bones, respectively.
Given the source joint Ji,t close to the center of gravity and
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 05:33:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

SONG et al.: DYNAMIC HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION USING ISTGCN
6233
the target joint Jj,t farther away from the center of gravity,
the bone data can be calculated as follows:
Bi, j,t =

x j,t −xi,t, y j,t −yi,t, z j,t −zi,t

.
(13)
Moreover, motion can be calculated by the coordinate
difference between the same joints in two consecutive frames:
Mi,t = Ji,t+1 −Ji,t, ∀i ∈V, t ∈T
(14)
Finally, the softmax scores of the three streams are fused
using weighted summation, and the hand gesture class is
predicted based on this score.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed
MS-ISTGCN and conventional methods with two widely
used public skeleton-based dynamic hand gesture datasets:
SHREC’17 Track [61] and DHG-14/28 [17]. Furthermore,
we perform various ablation studies to verify the effectiveness
of each component of the proposed model.
A. Datasets
1) SHREC’17 Track: The SHREC’17 Track dataset [61] is
a public dynamic hand gesture dataset that provides depth
image and skeleton data. Depth images of various lengths
are acquired by an Intel RealSense camera SR300 [37],
and hand skeletons are captured using the supplied software
development kit (SDK). The dataset contains the following
14 gestures obtained from 28 right-handed participants: Grab,
Tap, Expand, Pinch, Rotation clockwise (RC), Rotation coun-
terclockwise (RCC), Swipe right (SR), Swipe left (SL), Swipe
up (SU), Swipe down (SD), Swipe x (SX), Swipe + (S+),
Swipe v (SV), and Shake. Differences in both hand movement
and hand shape change must be considered to satisfy the
requirement of an application available in a human-computer
interface. Therefore, this dataset divides 14 gestures into two
categories: ﬁne and coarse. Fine gestures are motions that
represent changes in the shape of the hand, and coarse gestures
are motions related to the movement of the entire hand.
As shown in Fig. 2(b), each gesture is performed with two
hand shapes of one ﬁnger and the whole hand—gestures are
classiﬁed with either 14 or 28 labels, depending on the number
of ﬁngers used. The hand sequence is captured at 30 frames
per second, and the maximum length of frames is 180. Each
frame contains a depth image with 640 × 480 resolution and
coordinates of 22 hand joint positions in the 3D world space
and 2D image space. The structure of the skeleton returned
by the camera is shown in Fig. 2(a). The dataset consists of
2,800 sequences, with 1,960 sequences in the training dataset
and 840 in the testing dataset.
2) DHG-14/28: The DHG-14/28 dataset [17] uses the same
data collection method as the SHREC’17 Track dataset and
consists of 2800 sequences of 22 hand joints. Skeleton data
are collected from 20 participants, and each movement is
performed 5 times. The length of the sequence ranges from
20 to 150 frames. In contrast to the SHREC’17 Track dataset,
the DHG-14/28 dataset uses a leave-one-subject-out experi-
mental protocol. This is a cross-validation method in which
the data of 19 subjects are used as the training dataset and
the remaining one subject is used as the testing dataset. This
method is conducted 20 times, with the average used as the
ﬁnal recognition accuracy.
B. Training Details
We performed all our experiments with the PyTorch frame-
work using two NVIDIA TITAN Xp GPUs. We applied
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for training with a Nesterov
momentum of 0.9 as an optimization strategy. Furthermore,
the weight decay was set to 0.0001. We adopted the cross-
entropy loss as the loss function for the ﬁnal prediction and
minimized it. The batch size was 32 and the training was ended
in 150 epochs. The initial learning rate was 0.1 and divided
by 10 at 90 epochs and 130 epochs.
For stable initial learning, we applied a warm-up strategy
[62] that linearly increases the learning rate from 0 to an initial
value of 0.1 during the ﬁrst 20 epochs. Moreover, a dropout
layer with a drop rate of 0.4 was added between the GAP
and FC layers. We disturbed the hand joint coordinates by
applying random translation for data augmentation. Because
each gesture has a different frame sequence length, we set the
length of all sequences as the maximum number of frames to
fully exploit the provided coordinate data. We set sequences
with less than the maximum number of frames to zero until
they reach the maximum. Therefore, the SHREC’17 Track
dataset was set to 180, and the DHG-14/28 dataset was set
to 150.
C. Ablation Study
The proposed MS-ISTGCN consists of various novel com-
ponents. This section discusses the validity of the components
in the proposed MS-ISTGCN on the SHREC’17 Track and
action recognition datasets with only skeleton joint data.
We found the optimal condition with the highest performance
through an ablation study and applied it to the remaining
experiments on both datasets.
1) Comparisons of Block Architectures: The dynamic hand
gesture datasets have fewer frames and nodes and are smaller
than the human action datasets. Therefore, we experimented
with various architectures by changing the number of blocks to
ﬁnd the optimal structure for the dynamic hand gesture dataset.
As presented in Table I, the architecture of the eight blocks
had the highest accuracy. This architecture not only improved
performance by reducing the overﬁtting of the network but
also had the effect of reducing the size of the model.
2) Comparisons of Adaptive Spatial GC Layers: The pro-
posed adaptive graph convolution layer can learn graph topol-
ogy better adapted to the GCN-based dynamic hand gesture
recognition. This adaptive GC layer consists of the sum of
three adjacency matrices. We tested the performance of using
each of the matrices and several combinations of matrices
to ﬁnd the optimal graph adjacency matrix, with the results
presented in Table II. The experiment results reveal that the
highest accuracy is achieved when applying the A+B+C
adjacency matrix, which adds the original adjacency matrix A,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 05:33:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

6234
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2022
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS OF DIFFERENT NUMBER OF ISTGCN
BLOCKS ON SHREC’17 TRACK DATASET WITH 14 GESTURES
IN ACCURACY AND PARAMETER NUMBER. 64B DENOTES
THE “64-CHANNEL BLOCK”
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS OF DIFFERENT SPATIAL ADJACENCY
MATRIX ON SHREC’17 TRACK DATASET WITH
14 GESTURES IN ACCURACY AND
PARAMETER NUMBER
Fig. 8.
Example of the visualized adjacency matrices (a) the original
adjacency matrices and (b) the learned adjacency matrices of the ﬁrst block.
parameterized matrix B, and data-dependent matrix C mul-
tiplied by α. This method improved approximately 1.1%
compared with the one applying only the original adjacency
matrix A. Fig. 8 illustrates the original adjacency matrices and
the learned adjacency matrices. The three matrices of Fig. 8(a)
were the original adjacency matrices connected as shown in
Fig. 2(a), and the three matrices of Fig. 8(b) were the learned
adjacency matrices in the ﬁrst block. As shown in Fig. 8,
the adaptively learned adjacency matrices could acquire latent
relationships between joints without constraints on physical
connections. Moreover, considering the sample-dependent
adjacency matrix, the performance was further improved.
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS OF DIFFERENT TEMPORAL GRAPH
CONVOLUTION LAYER TYPES ON SHREC’17 TRACK DATASET
WITH 14 GESTURES IN ACCURACY AND PARAMETER
NUMBER. E DENOTES THE “EXTENDED” AND 
DENOTES THE KERNEL SIZE OF  × 1
CONVOLUTIONS DILATIONS OF THE
E-TGC METHODS ARE 1, 2 AND 3
TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS OF DIFFERENT ATTENTION LAYERS
ON SHREC’17 TRACK DATASET WITH 14 GESTURES
IN ACCURACY AND PARAMETER NUMBER
3) Comparisons of Extended Temporal GC Layers: We pro-
posed an extended temporal graph convolution layer using
multiple scale convolutions to obtain discriminative and infor-
mative temporal features. We selected the optimal extended
temporal graph convolution (E-TGC) layer for skeleton-based
dynamic hand gesture recognition by testing four different
kernel-sized TGC layers (d = 1, 2, 3), including basic TGC
( = 9, d = 1). The results are presented in Table III.
As presented in Table III, the E-TGC with kernel size  =
7 had the best performance. Furthermore, the proposed E-TGC
layer was a low computational architecture with signiﬁcantly
fewer parameters than the basic TGC method because it used
a bottleneck structure.
4) Comparison of Attention Layers: We evaluated the pro-
posed attention layer consisting of two sub-layers in com-
parison with previous methods. We compared the proposed
combination of effective spatio-temporal attention and channel
attention with other attention layers, (spatial-temporal-channel
(STC) attention [45] and ST-Joint attention [46]), with the
results presented in Table IV. The model’s accuracy improved
signiﬁcantly after using the attention layers compared with
the method without the attention layer. Furthermore, our
proposed method that applies effective-ST and channel atten-
tion together achieved much higher accuracy, although the
model complexity (number of parameters) slightly increased
compared with the other methods.
5) Effect of Multi-Stream Network: We veriﬁed the effec-
tiveness of using three input modalities, presenting the results
in Table V. We tested both 14 and 28 gestures for the
SHREC’17 Track dataset, with multi-stream methods out-
performing single-stream methods. The three single-stream
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 05:33:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

SONG et al.: DYNAMIC HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION USING ISTGCN
6235
TABLE V
ACCURACY COMPARISONS OF THE DIFFERENT DATA STREAMS
AND COMBINATIONS ON SHREC’17 TRACK DATASET
TABLE VI
COMPARISONS OF THE ACTION RECOGNITION PERFORMANCE WITH
THE STATE-OF-THE-ART METHODS ON THE NTU
RGB+D SKELETON DATASET
methods exhibit high performance in the order of joint modal-
ity, bone modality, and motion modality. The combination of
joint and bone modality achieved a slight improvement on the
14- and 28-gesture categories compared with the joint modal-
ity. The highest performance improvement occurred when
fusing the three modalities. Motion modality was essential
for improving performance in multi-stream, although single-
stream performance was relatively low.
6) Generalization Performance on Action Recognition:
Finally, we veriﬁed the generalization performance on action
recognition using the NTU RGB+D dataset [63]. It is the
most widely used action recognition dataset, which contains
56,578 skeleton sequences over 60 action classes captured
from 40 volunteers and 3 cameras with different views. This
dataset provides 25 body joints as nodes. It recommends
two settings: cross-subject (X-Sub) and cross-view (X-View),
where the subjects and cameras used in the training and test
splits are different, respectively.
Table VI presents the performance comparison for the pro-
posed and state-of-the-art methods on the action recognition
dataset. All methods compared are based on GCN and are
almost multi-stream structures. We further evaluated the four
streams method with the addition of bone motion stream
to compare with equally other methods on a large dataset.
The proposed method shows comparable accuracy for X-Sub
and the best accuracy for X-View, respectively. Therefore,
the proposed method has good generalization performance on
Fig. 9.
Confusion matrix of the proposed method on SHREC’17 Track
dataset with 14 gestures.
TABLE VII
COMPARISONS OF DYNAMIC HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION
PERFORMANCE WITH THE STATE-OF-THE-ART METHODS
ON SHREC’17 TRACK DATASET. MS DENOTES
THE “MULTI-STREAM”
action recognition as well as hand gesture recognition task.
In addition, the proposed method has the advantage of rela-
tively small computational cost compared to other methods.
D. Comparison With State-of-the-Art Methods
We compared the performance of the proposed method
and several state-of-the-art methods on the SHREC’17 Track
dataset and DHG-14/28 dataset, respectively. The results are
as follows.
1) Performance Comparison on SHREC’17 Track Dataset:
Table VII presents the results of comparing our method, hand-
crafted feature-based methods [17, 21], and deep learning-
based methods [24], [25], [30]–[35], [43], [53], [54] on the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 05:33:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

6236
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2022
Fig. 10.
Confusion matrix of the proposed method on SHREC’17 Track dataset with 28 gestures. The gestures annotated (1) and (2) are respectively
performed using one ﬁnger and with the whole hand.
SHREC’17 Track dataset. The accuracy of the DLSTM [31]
method was 97.6% for the 14-gesture category. This method
used handcrafted angular features from hand joints as the input
to the LSTM-RNN network. The accuracies of the SAGCN +
RBi-IndRNN [25] method were 96.3% and 94.1% for the
14- and 28-gesture categories, respectively. This method was
a two-stream network fusing a self-attention-based GCN that
is advantageous for capturing spatial information and a bidi-
rectional RNN, which is advantageous for capturing temporal
information. However, these RNN-based networks still had a
gradient decay problem during training, resulting in perfor-
mance degradation.
Our method achieved the second-highest recognition accu-
racy of 96.7% on 14 gestures, which is 0.9% lower than the
DLSTM [31] method. The accuracy of the proposed network
on 28 gestures is 94.9%, which is 0.8% higher than the state-
of-the-art method because our method used enhanced attention
features that incorporate both learned spatial information and
temporal information captured from a wide receptive ﬁeld,
fusing scores from the three modalities to predict gestures.
Therefore, the proposed method outperformed these con-
ventional approaches and achieved the competitive and best
performance.
Figs. 9 and 10 show the confusion matrices on 14 and
28 gestures for the SHREC’17 Track dataset. The color
of the confusion matrix indicates prediction accuracy while
distinguishing each label. Our method achieved 100% accu-
racy in speciﬁc categories. Furthermore, the recognition rate
on 14 gestures was over 88%, exhibiting high performance.
As shown in Fig. 10, the relatively low accuracy of the “Tab”
gesture was due to the motion similarity between “Tab” and
“Grab” in the one ﬁnger category.
Fig. 11.
Confusion matrix of the proposed method on DHG-14/28 dataset
with 14 gesture categories.
2) Performance
Comparison
on
DHG-14/28
Dataset:
Table VIII presents the performance comparison for the pro-
posed and state-of-the-art methods on the DHG-14/28 dataset.
Our method outperformed the state-of-the-art methods on
both the 14- and 28-gesture categories of the DHG-14/28
dataset and achieved accuracies of 93.7% and 91.2%, respec-
tively. The spatial perception and temporal perception streams
(SPTP) [34] method maximized the advantages of 2D-CNN
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 05:33:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

SONG et al.: DYNAMIC HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION USING ISTGCN
6237
Fig. 12.
Confusion matrix of the proposed method on DHG-14/28 dataset with 28 gesture categories.
TABLE VIII
COMPARISONS OF DYNAMIC HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION
PERFORMANCE WITH THE STATE-OF-THE-ART
METHODS ON DHG-14/28 DATASET
and increased the accuracy with a two-stream structure. How-
ever, the performance was lower than our method because it
is impossible to extract enhanced spatial features using the
skeleton data graph. Our method outperformed the state-of-
the-art methods by 0.6% and 1.4% on the 14- and 28-gesture
categories, respectively.
Figs. 11 and 12 are confusion matrices that illustrate the
detailed results of 14 and 28 gestures for the DHG-14/28
dataset. In Fig. 11, the “Grab” and “Pinch” accuracies were
low at 75.2% and 74.3%, respectively. Similarly, in Fig. 12, for
28 gestures, both gestures had low accuracy. They misclassify
each other because the spatial variation in the two hand
gestures is similar when analyzing the skeleton data.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH
This paper proposed an MS-ISTGCN with a spatial GC
layer, enhanced attention layer, and improved temporal GC
layer for skeleton-based dynamic hand gesture recognition.
Moreover, an adaptive graph convolution layer that can learn
the relationship between distant hand joints and a multiple
scale temporal convolution layer that can cover a wide recep-
tive ﬁeld was proposed to model spatial pose features and tem-
poral motion features of dynamic hand gestures. An attention
layer was also proposed that uses a combination of effective
spatio-temporal co-attention and channel attention to ﬁnd the
most informative joints, frames, and features from skeleton
sequences. Finally, performance was improved by applying a
multi-stream structure with joints, bones, and joint motions as
inputs to take full advantage of the low-level features. Experi-
mental results demonstrated that our network outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods on two public datasets of dynamic
hand gesture recognition.
Future research will focus on how to combine a 3D hand
pose estimation algorithm and a skeleton-based dynamic hand
gesture recognition algorithm in one framework.
REFERENCES
[1] S. S. Rautaray and A. Agrawal, “Vision based hand gesture recognition
for human computer interaction: A survey,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 43,
no. 1, pp. 1–54, Jan. 2015.
[2] H. Cheng, L. Yang, and Z. Liu, “Survey on 3D hand gesture recognition,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1659–1673,
Sep. 2016.
[3] N. C. Camgoz, S. Hadﬁeld, O. Koller, H. Ney, and R. Bowden, “Neural
sign language translation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 93–7784.
[4] C. Linqin, C. Shuangjie, and X. Min, “Dynamic hand gesture recognition
using RGB-D data for natural human-computer interaction,” J. Intell.
Fuzzy Syst., vol. 323, no. 3, pp. 495–507, 2017.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 05:33:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

6238
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2022
[5] T.-D. Tan and Z.-M. Guo, “Research of hand positioning and gesture
recognition based on binocular vision,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
VR Innov., Mar. 2011, pp. 311–315.
[6] Y. Zhang, C. Cao, J. Cheng, and H. Lu, “Egogesture: A new dataset
and benchmark for egocentric hand gesture recognition,” IEEE Trans.
Multimedia, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 1038–1050, May 2018.
[7] J. L. Raheja, G. A. Rajsekhar, and A. Chaudhary, “Controlling a
remotely located robot using hand gestures in real time: A DSP
implementation,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Wireless Netw. Embedded Syst.
(WECON), Oct. 2016, pp. 1–5.
[8] R. Li, H. Wang, and Z. Liu, “Survey on mapping human hand motion to
robotic hands for teleoperation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Tech-
nol., early access, Aug. 8, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TCSVT.2021.3057992.
[9] G.-F. He, J.-W. Park, S.-K. Kang, and S.-T. Jung, “Development of
gesture recognition-based serious games,” in Proc. IEEE-EMBS Int.
Conf. Biomed. Health Informat., Jan. 2012, pp. 922–925.
[10] M. Oudah, A. Al-Naji, and J. Chahl, “Hand gesture recognition based
on computer vision: A review of techniques,” J. Imag., vol. 6, no. 8,
p. 73, Jul. 2020.
[11] L. Dipietro, A. M. Sabatini, and P. Dario, “A survey of glove-based
systems and their applications,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. C,
Appl. Rev., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 461–482, Jul. 2008.
[12] W. T. Freeman and M. Roth, “Orientation histograms for hand gesture
recognition,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Automatic Face Gesture Recognit.,
Jun. 1995, pp. 296–301.
[13] P. Molchanov, S. Gupta, K. Kim, and J. Kautz, “Hand gesture recogni-
tion with 3D convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Com-
put. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2015, pp. 1–7.
[14] C. Wang, Z. Liu, and S.-C. Chan, “Superpixel-based hand gesture
recognition with Kinect depth camera,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 17,
no. 1, pp. 29–39, Jan. 2015.
[15] P. Narayana, J. R. Beveridge, and B. A. Draper, “Gesture recognition:
Focus on the hands,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 5235–5244.
[16] J.
Sanchez-Riera,
K.
Srinivasan,
K.-L.
Hua,
W.-H.
Cheng,
M. A. Hossain, and M. F. Alhamid, “Robust RGB-D hand tracking
using deep learning priors,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 2289–2301, Sep. 2018.
[17] Q. De Smedt, H. Wannous, and J.-P. Vandeborre, “Skeleton-based
dynamic hand gesture recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2016, pp. 1206–1214.
[18] Q. De Smedt, H. Wannous, and J.-P. Vandeborre, “Heterogeneous hand
gesture recognition using 3D dynamic skeletal data,” Comput. Vis. Image
Understand., vol. 181, pp. 60–72, Apr. 2019.
[19] S. Y. Boulahia, E. Anquetil, F. Multon, and R. Kulpa, “Dynamic hand
gesture recognition based on 3D pattern assembled trajectories,” in Proc.
7th Int. Conf. Image Process. Theory, Tools Appl. (IPTA), Nov. 2017,
pp. 1–6.
[20] F. M. Caputo, P. Prebianca, A. Carcangiu, L. D. Spano, and A. Giachetti,
“Comparing 3D trajectories for simple mid-air gesture recognition,”
Comput. Graph., vol. 73, pp. 17–25, Jun. 2018.
[21] O. Oreifej and Z. Liu, “HON4D: Histogram of oriented 4D normals for
activity recognition from depth sequences,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2013, pp. 716–723.
[22] X. Chen, H. Guo, G. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Motion feature augmented
recurrent neural network for skeleton-based dynamic hand gesture
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Sep. 2017,
pp. 2881–2885.
[23] L. Zhang, G. Zhu, P. Shen, J. Song, S. A. Shah, and M. Bennamoun,
“Learning spatiotemporal features using 3DCNN and convolutional
LSTM for gesture recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
Workshops (ICCVW), Oct. 2017, pp. 3120–3128.
[24] X. Chen, G. Wang, H. Guo, C. Zhang, H. Wang, and L. Zhang,
“MFA-net: Motion feature augmented network for dynamic hand gesture
recognition from skeletal data,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 2, p. 239, Jan. 2019.
[25] C. Li, S. Li, Y. Gao, X. Zhang, and W. Li, “A two-stream neural network
for pose-based hand gesture recognition,” 2021, arXiv:2101.08926.
[26] J. Weng, M. Liu, X. Jiang, and J. Yuan, “Deformable pose traversal
convolution for 3D action and gesture recognition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Sep. 2018, pp. 142–157.
[27] J. C. Nú¯nez, R. Cabido, J. J. Pantrigo, A. S. Montemayor, and
J. F. Vélez, “Convolutional neural networks and long short-term memory
for skeleton-based human activity and hand gesture recognition,” Pattern
Recognit., vol. 76, pp. 80–94, Apr. 2018.
[28] S. Shin and W.-Y. Kim, “Skeleton-based dynamic hand gesture recog-
nition using a part-based GRU-RNN for gesture-based interface,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 50236–50243, 2020.
[29] G. Devineau, F. Moutarde, W. Xi, and J. Yang, “Deep learning for hand
gesture recognition on skeletal data,” in Proc. 13th IEEE Int. Conf.
Autom. Face Gesture Recognit. (FG), May 2018, pp. 106–113.
[30] F. Yang, Y. Wu, S. Sakti, and S. Nakamura, “Make skeleton-based action
recognition model smaller, faster and better,” in Proc. ACM Multimedia
Asia, Dec. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[31] D. Avola, M. Bernardi, L. Cinque, G. L. Foresti, and C. Massaroni,
“Exploiting recurrent neural networks and leap motion controller for
the recognition of sign language and semaphoric hand gestures,” IEEE
Trans. Multimedia, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 234–245, Jan. 2019.
[32] X. S. Nguyen, L. Brun, O. Lezoray, and S. Bougleux, “A neural
network based on SPD manifold learning for skeleton-based hand
gesture recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, p. 12036.
[33] J. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, V. Prinet, S. Xiang, and C. Pan, “Decoupled
representation learning for skeleton-based gesture recognition,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
pp. 5751–5760.
[34] Y. Li, D. Ma, Y. Yu, G. Wei, and Y. Zhou, “Compact joints encoding
for skeleton-based dynamic hand gesture recognition,” Comput. Graph.,
vol. 97, pp. 191–199, Jun. 2021.
[35] J. Hou, G. Wang, X. Chen, J.-H. Xue, R. Zhu, and H. Yang, “Spatial-
temporal attention res-TCN for skeleton-based dynamic hand gesture
recognition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Workshops, Sep. 2018,
pp. 273–286.
[36] Z. Zhang, “Microsoft Kinect sensor and its effect,” IEEE MultiMedia,
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 4–10, Feb. 2012.
[37] L. Keselman, J. I. Woodﬁll, A. Grunnet-Jepsen, and A. Bhowmik,
“Intel(R) RealSense(TM) stereoscopic depth cameras,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jul. 2017,
pp. 1–10.
[38] J.-H. Song and S.-J. Kang, “3D hand pose estimation via graph-based
reasoning,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 35824–35833, 2021.
[39] P. Ren et al., “Spatial-aware stacked regression network for real-time 3D
hand pose estimation,” Neurocomputing, vol. 437, pp. 42–57, May 2021.
[40] M. Oberweger and V. Lepetit, “DeepPrior++: Improving fast and accu-
rate 3D hand pose estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
Workshops (ICCVW), Oct. 2017, pp. 585–594.
[41] H. Liang, J. Yuan, and D. Thalmann, “Resolving ambiguous hand pose
predictions by exploiting part correlations,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Video Technol., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 1125–1139, Jul. 2015.
[42] L. Xu, C. Hu, J. Tao, J. Xue, and K. Mei, “Improve regression network
on depth hand pose estimation with auxiliary variable,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 890–904, Mar. 2021.
[43] S. Yan, Y. Xiong, and D. Lin, “Spatial temporal graph convolutional
networks for skeleton-based action recognition,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 7444–7452.
[44] L. Shi, Y. Zhang, J. Cheng, and H. Lu, “Two-stream adaptive graph
convolutional networks for skeleton-based action recognition,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
pp. 12026–12035.
[45] L. Shi, Y. Zhang, J. Cheng, and H. Lu, “Skeleton-based action recog-
nition with multi-stream adaptive graph convolutional networks,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 29, pp. 9532–9545, 2020.
[46] Y.-F. Song, Z. Zhang, C. Shan, and L. Wang, “Constructing stronger
and faster baselines for skeleton-based action recognition,” 2021,
arXiv:2106.15125.
[47] C. Wu, X.-J. Wu, and J. Kittler, “Graph2Net: Perceptually-enriched
graph learning for skeleton-based action recognition,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. Video Technol., early access, Jun. 3, 2021, doi: 10.1109/
TCSVT.2021.3085959.
[48] Y.-F. Song, Z. Zhang, C. Shan, and L. Wang, “Richly activated graph
convolutional network for robust skeleton-based action recognition,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1915–1925,
May 2021.
[49] Z. Liu, H. Zhang, Z. Chen, Z. Wang, and W. Ouyang, “Disentangling
and unifying graph convolutions for skeleton-based action recognition,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2020, pp. 143–152.
[50] P. Zhang, C. Lan, W. Zeng, J. Xing, J. Xue, and N. Zheng, “Semantics-
guided neural networks for efﬁcient skeleton-based human action recog-
nition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 1112–1121.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 05:33:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

SONG et al.: DYNAMIC HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION USING ISTGCN
6239
[51] L. Shi, Y. Zhang, J. Cheng, and H. Lu, “Skeleton-based action
recognition
with
directed
graph
neural
networks,”
in
Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
pp. 7912–7921.
[52] F. Ye, S. Pu, Q. Zhong, C. Li, D. Xie, and H. Tang, “Dynamic
GCN: Context-enriched topology learning for skeleton-based action
recognition,” in Proc. 28th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2020,
pp. 55–63.
[53] Y. Chen, L. Zhao, X. Peng, J. Yuan, and D. N. Metaxas, “Construct
dynamic graphs for hand gesture recognition via spatial-temporal atten-
tion,” in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf. (BMVC), 2019, pp. 1–13.
[54] Y. Li, Z. He, X. Ye, Z. He, and K. Han, “Spatial temporal graph
convolutional networks for skeleton-based dynamic hand gesture recog-
nition,” Eurasip J. Image Video Process., vol. 2019, no. 1, pp. 1–7,
2019.
[55] M. Tan et al., “Bidirectional posture-appearance interaction network for
driver behavior recognition,” IEEE Trans. Intaell. Transp. Syst., early
access, Nov. 13, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TITS.2021.3123127.
[56] C. Si, W. Chen, W. Wang, L. Wang, and T. Tan, “An attention
enhanced graph convolutional LSTM network for skeleton-based action
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 1227–1236.
[57] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. ICLR, 2017, pp. 1–14.
[58] C. Szegedy, S. Ioffe, V. Vanhoucke, and A. A. Alemi, “Inception-v4
inception-ResNet and the impact of residual connections on learning,”
in Proc. AAAI, 2016, pp. 4278–4284.
[59] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
pp. 7132–7141.
[60] Q. Hou, D. Zhou, and J. Feng, “Coordinate attention for efﬁcient
mobile network design,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 13713–13722.
[61] Q. D. Smedt, H. Wannous, J.-P. Vandeborre, J. Guerry, B. L. Saux, and
D. Filliat, “SHREC’17 track: 3D hand gesture recognition using a depth
and skeletal dataset,” in Proc. Eurographics Workshop 3D Object Retr.,
2017, pp. 33–38.
[62] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[63] A. Shahroudy, J. Liu, T.-T. Ng, and G. Wang, “NTU RGB+D: A large
scale dataset for 3D human activity analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 1010–1019.
Jae-Hun Song received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in electronic engineering from Hanyang Univer-
sity, South Korea, in 2001 and 2003, respectively.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in elec-
tronic engineering with Sogang University. He is
working in circuit design and medium display
product development with LG Display Company,
Ltd., South Korea. His current research interests
include image processing, computer vision, and deep
learning.
Kyeongbo Kong received the B.S. degree in elec-
tronics engineering from Sogang University, Seoul,
South Korea, in 2015, and the M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical engineering from the Pohang
University of Science and Technology (POSTECH),
Pohang, South Korea, in 2017 and 2020, respec-
tively. From 2020 to 2021, he was worked as a
Post-Doctoral Fellow at the Department of Electrical
Engineering, POSTECH. He is currently an Assis-
tant Professor with the Department of Media School,
Pukyong National University, Busan, South Korea.
His current research interests include image processing, computer vision,
machine learning, and deep learning.
Suk-Ju Kang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in electronic engineering from Sogang Uni-
versity, South Korea, in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree
in electrical and computer engineering from the
Pohang University of Science and Technology,
in 2011. From 2011 to 2012, he
was a Senior
Researcher at LG Display, where he was a Project
Leader for resolution enhancement and multi-view
3D system projects. From 2012 to 2015, he was
an Assistant Professor of electrical engineering at
Dong-A University, Busan. He is currently a Pro-
fessor of electronic engineering with Sogang University. His current research
interests include image analysis and enhancement, video processing, multime-
dia signal processing, circuit design for display systems, and deep learning
systems. He was a recipient of the IEIE/IEEE Joint Award for Young IT
Engineer of the Year, in 2019.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Lovely Professional University - Phagwara. Downloaded on March 27,2026 at 05:33:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

